

1594
THE RAPE OF LUCRECE



DEDICATION

TO THE 
RIGHT HONOURABLE 
HENRY WRIOTHESLEY, 
EARL OF SOUTHAMPTON, AND BARON 
OF TITCHFIELD

  The love I dedicate to your lordship is without end: whereof this 
pamphlet, without beginning is but a superfluous moiety. The warrant I 
have of your honourable disposition, not the worth of my untutored 
lines, make it assured of acceptance. What I have done is yours; 
what I have to do is yours; being part in all I have, devoted yours. 
Were my worth greater, my duty would show greater; meantime, as it is, 
it is bound to your lordship, to whom I wish long life still 
lengthened with all happiness. 
 

                              Your lordship's in all duty, 
                                       William Shakespeare
 
  THE ARGUMENT

  Lucius Tarquinius, for his excessive pride surnamed Superbus, 
after he had caused his own father-in-law Servius Tullius to be 
cruelly murdered, and, contrary to the Roman laws and customs, not 
requiring or staying for the people's suffrages, had possessed himself 
of the kingdom, went accompanied with his sons and other noblemen of 
Rome, to besiege Ardea. During which siege the principal men of the 
army meeting one evening at the tent of Sextus Tarquinius, the 
king's son, in their discourses after supper every one commended the 
virtues of his own wife; among whom Collatinus extolled the 
incomparable chastity of his wife Lucretia. In that pleasant humour 
they all posted to Rome; and intending, by their secret and sudden 
arrival, to make trial of that which every one had before avouched, 
only Collatinus finds his wife, though it were late in the night, 
spinning amongst her maids: the other ladies were all found dancing 
and revelling, or in several disports. Whereupon the noblemen 
yielded Collatinus the victory, and his wife the fame. At that time 
Sextus Tarquinius being inflamed with Lucrece' beauty, yet 
smothering his passions for the present, departed with the rest back 
to the camp; from whence he shortly after privily withdrew himself, 
and was, according to his estate, royally entertained and lodged by 
Lucrece at Collatium. The same night he treacherously stealeth into 
her chamber, violently ravished her, and early in the morning speedeth 
away. Lucrece, in this lamentable plight, hastily dispatcheth 
messengers, one to Rome for her father, another to the camp for 
Collatine. They came, the one accompanied with Junius Brutus, the 
other with Publius Valerius; and finding Lucrece attired in mourning 
habit, demanded the cause of her sorrow. She, first taking an oath 
of them for her revenge, revealed the actor and whole manner of his 
dealing, and withal suddenly stabbed herself. Which done, with one 
consent they all vowed to root out the whole hated family of the 
Tarquins; and bearing the dead body to Rome, Brutus acquainted the 
people with the doer and manner of the vile deed, with a bitter 
invective against the tyranny of the king: wherewith the people were 
so moved, that with one consent and a general acclamation the Tarquins 
were all exiled, and the state government changed from kings to 
consuls.

 F 
ROM the besieged Ardea all in post, 
      Borne by the trustless wings of false desire, 
      Lust-breathed Tarquin leaves the Roman host, 
      And to Collatium bears the lightless fire 
      Which, in pale embers hid, lurks to aspire 
        And girdle with embracing flames the waist 
        Of Collatine's fair love, Lucrece the chaste.

      Haply that name of chaste unhapp'ly set 
      This bateless edge on his keen appetite; 
      When Collatine unwisely did not let 
      To praise the clear unmatched red and white 
      Which triumphed in that sky of his delight, 
        Where mortal stars, as bright as heaven's beauties, 
        With pure aspects did him peculiar duties.

      For he the night before, in Tarquin's tent, 
      Unlocked the treasure of his happy state; 
      What priceless wealth the heavens had him lent 
      In the possession of his beauteous mate; 
      Reck'ning his fortune at such high-proud rate 
        That kings might be espoused to more fame, 
        But king nor peer to such a peerless dame.

      O happiness enjoyed but of a few! 
      And, if possessed, as soon decayed and done 
      As is the morning silver-melting dew 
      Against the golden splendour of the sun! 
      An expired date, cancelled ere well begun: 
        Honour and beauty, in the owner's arms, 
        Are weakly fortressed from a world of harms.

      Beauty itself doth of itself persuade 
      The eyes of men without an orator; 
      What needeth then apology be made, 
      To set forth that which is so singular? 
      Or why is Collatine the publisher 
        Of that rich jewel he should keep unknown 
        From thievish ears, because it is his own?

      Perchance his boast of Lucrece' sov'reignty 
      Suggested this proud issue of a king; 
      For by our ears our hearts oft tainted be. 
      Perchance that envy of so rich a thing, 
      Braving compare, disdainfully did sting 
        His high-pitched thoughts, that meaner men should vaunt 
        That golden hap which their superiors want.

      But some untimely thought did instigate 
      His all too timeless speed, if none of those. 
      His honour, his affairs, his friends, his state, 
      Neglected all, with swift intent he goes 
      To quench the coal which in his liver glows. 
        O rash-false heat, wrapped in repentant cold, 
        Thy hasty spring still blasts, and ne'er grows old!

      When at Collatium this false lord arrived, 
      Well was he welcomed by the Roman dame, 
      Within whose face beauty and virtue strived 
      Which of them both should underprop her fame: 
      When virtue bragged, beauty would blush for shame; 
        When beauty boasted blushes, in despite 
        Virtue would stain that o'er with silver white.

      But beauty, in that white entituled, 
      From Venus' doves doth challenge that fair field; 
      Then virtue claims from beauty beauty's red, 
      Which virtue gave the golden age to gild 
      Their silver cheeks, and called it then their shield; 
        Teaching them thus to use it in the fight, 
        When shame assailed, the red should fence the white.

      This heraldry in Lucrece' face was seen, 
      Argued by beauty's red and virtue's white; 
      Of either's colour was the other queen, 
      Proving from world's minority their right; 
      Yet their ambition makes them still to fight, 
        The sovereignty of either being so great 
        That oft they interchange each other's seat.

      This silent war of lilies and of roses 
      Which Tarquin viewed in her fair face's field, 
      In their pure ranks his traitor eye encloses; 
      Where, lest between them both it should be killed, 
      The coward captive vanquished doth yield 
        To those two armies that would let him go 
        Rather than triumph in so false a foe.

      Now thinks he that her husband's shallow tongue, 
      The niggard prodigal that praised her so, 
      In that high task hath done her beauty wrong, 
      Which far exceeds his barren skill to show; 
      Therefore that praise which Collatine doth owe 
        Enchanted Tarquin answers with surmise, 
        In silent wonder of still-gazing eyes.

      This earthly saint, adored by this devil, 
      Little suspecteth the false worshipper; 
      "For unstained thoughts do seldom dream on evil; 
      "Birds never limed no secret bushes fear. 
      So guiltless she securely gives good cheer 
        And reverend welcome to her princely guest, 
        Whose inward ill no outward harm expressed;

      For that he coloured with his high estate, 
      Hiding base sin in pleats of majesty; 
      That nothing in him seemed inordinate, 
      Save sometime too much wonder of his eye, 
      Which, having all, all could not satisfy; 
        But, poorly rich, so wanteth in his store 
        That cloyed with much he pineth still for more.

      But she, that never coped with stranger eyes, 
      Could pick no meaning from their parling looks, 
      Nor read the subtle-shining secrecies 
      Writ in the glassy margents of such books. 
      She touched no unknown baits, nor feared no hooks; 
        Nor could she moralize his wanton sight, 
        More than his eyes were opened to the light.

      He stories to her ears her husband's fame, 
      Won in the fields of fruitful Italy; 
      And decks with praises Collatine's high name, 
      Made glorious by his manly chivalry 
      With bruised arms and wreaths of victory. 
        Her joy with heaved-up hand she doth express, 
        And wordless so greets heaven for his success.

      Far from the purpose of his coming thither, 
      He makes excuses for his being there. 
      No cloudy show of stormy blust'ring weather 
      Doth yet in his fair welkin once appear; 
      Till sable Night, mother of dread and fear, 
        Upon the world dim darkness doth display, 
        And in her vaulty prison stows the day.

      For then is Tarquin brought unto his bed, 
      Intending weariness with heavy sprite; 
      For after supper long he questioned 
      With modest Lucrece, and wore out the night. 
      Now leaden slumber with life's strength doth fight; 
        And every one to rest himself betakes, 
        Save thieves and cares and troubled minds that wakes.

      As one of which doth Tarquin lie revolving 
      The sundry dangers of his will's obtaining; 
      Yet ever to obtain his will resolving, 
      Though weak-built hopes persuade him to abstaining; 
      Despair to gain doth traffic oft for gaining, 
        And when great treasure is the meed proposed, 
        Though death be adjunct, there's no death supposed.

      Those that much covet are with gain' so fond 
      That what they have not, that which they possess, 
      They scatter and unloose it from their bond, 
      And so, by hoping more, they have but less; 
      Or, gaining more, the profit of excess 
        Is but to surfeit, and such griefs sustain 
        That they prove bankrupt in this poor-rich gain.

      The aim of all is but to nurse the life 
      With honour, wealth and ease, in waning age; 
      And in this aim there is such thwarting strife 
      That one for all or all for one we gage: 
      As life for honour in fell battle's rage; 
        Honour for wealth; and oft that wealth doth cost 
        The death of all, and all together lost.

      So that in vent'ring ill we leave to be 
      The things we are for that which we expect; 
      And this ambitious foul infirmity, 
      In having much, torments us with defect 
      Of that we have; so then we do neglect 
        The thing we have, and, all for want of wit, 
        Make something nothing by augmenting it.

      Such hazard now must doting Tarquin make, 
      Pawning his honour to obtain his lust; 
      And for himself himself he must forsake: 
      Then where is truth, if there be no self-trust? 
      When shall he think to find a stranger just 
        When he himself himself confounds, betrays 
        To sland'rous tongues and wretched hateful days?

      Now stole upon the time the dead of night, 
      When heavy sleep had closed up mortal eyes; 
      No comfortable star did lend his light, 
      No noise but owls' and wolves' death-boding cries; 
      Now serves the season that they may surprise 
        The silly lambs. Pure thoughts are dead and still, 
        While lust and murder wakes to stain and kill.

      And now this lustful lord, leaped from his bed, 
      Throwing his mantle rudely o'er his arm, 
      Is madly tossed between desire and dread; 
      Th' one sweetly flatters, th' other feareth harm; 
      But honest fear, bewitched with lust's foul charm, 
        Doth too too oft betake him to retire, 
        Beaten away by brain-sick rude desire.

      His falchion on a flint he softly smiteth, 
      That from the cold stone sparks of fire do fly, 
      Whereat a waxen torch forthwith he lighteth, 
      Which must be lode-star to his lustful eye; 
      And to the flame thus speaks advisedly: 
        'As from this cold flint I enforced this fire, 
        So Lucrece must I force to my desire.'

      Here pale with fear he doth premeditate 
      The dangers of his loathsome enterprise, 
      And in his inward mind he doth debate 
      What following sorrow may on this arise; 
      Then, looking scornfully, he doth despise 
        His naked armour of still-slaughtered lust, 
        And justly thus controls his thoughts unjust:

      'Fair torch, burn out thy light, and lend it not 
      To darken her whose light excelleth thine; 
      And die, unhallowed thoughts, before you blot 
      With your uncleanness that which is divine; 
      Offer pure incense to so pure a shrine; 
        Let fair humanity abhor the deed 
        That spots and stains love's modest snow-white weed.

      'O shame to knighthood and to shining arms! 
      O foul dishonour to my household's grave! 
      O impious act, including all foul harms! 
      A martial man to be soft fancy's slave! 
      True valour still a true respect should have; 
        Then my digression is so vile, so base, 
        That it will live engraven in my face.

      'Yea, though I die, the scandal will survive, 
      And be an eye-sore in my golden coat; 
      Some loathsome dash the herald will contrive, 
      To cipher me how fondly I did dote; 
      That my posterity, shamed with the note, 
        Shall curse my bones, and hold it for no sin 
        To wish that I their father had not been.

      'What win I, if I gain the thing I seek? 
      A dream, a breath, a froth of fleeting joy- 
      Who buys a minute's mirth to wail a week? 
      Or sells eternity to get a toy? 
      For one sweet grape who will the vine destroy? 
        Or what fond beggar, but to touch the crown, 
        Would with the sceptre straight be strucken down'

      'If Collatinus dream of my intent, 
      Will he not wake, and in a desp'rate rage 
      Post hither, this vile purpose to prevent?- 
      This siege that hath engirt his marriage, 
      This blur to youth,' this sorrow to the sage, 
        This dying virtue, this surviving shame, 
        Whose crime will bear an ever-during blame.

      'O what excuse can my invention make, 
      When thou shalt charge me with so black a deed? 
      Will not my tongue be mute, my frail joints shake, 
      Mine eyes forego their light, my false heart bleed? 
      The guilt being great, the fear doth still exceed; 
        And extreme fear can neither fight nor fly, 
        But coward-like with trembling terror die.

      'Had Collatinus killed my son or sire, 
      Or lain in ambush to betray my life, 
      Or were he not my dear friend, this desire 
      Might have excuse to work upon his wife, 
      As in revenge or quittal of such strife; 
        But as he is my kinsman, my dear friend, 
        The shame and fault finds no excuse nor end.

      'Shameful it is-ay, if the fact be known; 
      Hateful it is-there is no hate in loving; 
      I'll beg her love-but she is not her own; 
      The worst is but denial and reproving. 
      My will is strong, past reason's weak removing.- 
        Who fears a sentence or an old man's saw 
        Shall by a painted cloth be kept in awe.'

      Thus graceless holds he disputation 
      'Tween frozen conscience and hot-burning will, 
      And with good thoughts makes dispensation, 
      Urging the worser sense for vantage still; 
      Which in a moment doth confound and kill 
        All pure effects, and doth so far proceed 
        That what is vile shows like a virtuous deed.

      Quoth he, 'She took me kindly by the hand, 
      And gazed for tidings in my eager eyes, 
      Fearing some hard news from the warlike band 
      Where her beloved Collatinus lies. 
      O how her fear did make her colour rise! 
        First red as roses that on lawn we lay, 
        Then white as lawn, the roses took away.

      'And how her hand, in my hand being locked, 
      Forced it to tremble with her loyal fear! 
      Which struck her sad, and then it faster rocked 
      Until her husband's welfare she did hear; 
      Whereat she smiled with so sweet a cheer 
        That had Narcissus seen her as she stood 
        Self-love had never drowned him in the flood.

      'Why hunt I then for colour or excuses? 
      All orators are dumb when beauty pleadeth; 
      Poor wretches have remorse in poor abuses; 
      Love thrives not in the heart that shadows dreadeth; 
      Affection is my captain, and he leadeth; 
        And when his gaudy banner is displayed, 
        The coward fights and will not be dismayed.

      'Then childish fear avaunt! debating die! 
      Respect and reason wait on wrinkled age! 
      My heart shall never countermand mine eye; 
      Sad pause and deep regard beseems the sage; 
      My part is youth, and beats these from the stage: 
        Desire my pilot is, beauty my prize; 
        Then who fears sinking where such treasure lies?'

      As corn o'ergrown by weeds, so heedful fear 
      Is almost choked by unresisted lust. 
      Away he steals with open list'ning car, 
      Full of foul hope and full of fond mistrust; 
      Both which, as servitors to the unjust, 
        So cross him with their opposite persuasion 
        That now he vows a league and now invasion.

      Within his thought her heavenly image sits, 
      And in the selfsame seat sits Collatine. 
      That eye which looks on her confounds his wits; 
      That eye which him beholds, as more divine, 
      Unto a view so false will not incline; 
        But with a pure appeal seeks to the heart, 
        Which once corrupted takes the worser part;

      And therein heartens up his servile powers, 
      Who, flatt'red by their leader's jocund show, 
      Stuff up his lust, as minutes fill up hours; 
      And as their captain, so their pride doth grow, 
      Paying more slavish tribute than they owe. 
        By reprobate desire thus madly led, 
        The Roman lord marcheth to Lucrece' bed.

      The locks between her chamber and his will, 
      Each one by him enforced, retires his ward; 
      But, as they open, they all rate his ill, 
      Which drives the creeping thief to some regard. 
      The threshold grates the door to have him heard; 
        Night-wand'ring weasels shriek to see him there; 
        They fright him, yet he still pursues his fear.

      As each unwilling portal yields him way, 
      Through little vents and crannies of the place 
      The wind wars with his torch to make him stay, 
      And blows the smoke of it into his face, 
      Extinguishing his conduct in this case; 
        But his hot heart, which fond desire doth scorch, 
        Puffs forth another wind that fires the torch;

      And being lighted, by the light he spies 
      Lucretia's glove, wherein her needle sticks; 
      He takes it from the rushes where it lies, 
      And griping it, the needle his finger pricks, 
      As who should say 'This glove to wanton tricks 
        Is not inured. Return again in haste; 
        Thou see'st our mistress' ornaments are chaste.'

      But all these poor forbiddings could not stay him; 
      He in the worst sense consters their denial: 
      The doors, the wind, the glove, that did delay him, 
      He takes for accidental things of trial; 
      Or as those bars which stop the hourly dial, 
        Who with a ling'ring stay his course doth let, 
        Till every minute pays the hour his debt.

      'So, so,' quoth he, 'these lets attend the time, 
      Like little frosts that sometime threat the spring, 
      To add a more rejoicing to the prime, 
      And give the sneaped birds more cause to sing. 
      Pain pays the income of each precious thing; 
        Huge rocks; high winds, strong pirates, shelves and sands 
        The merchant fears, ere rich at home he lands.'

      Now is he come unto the chamber door 
      That shuts him from the heaven of his thought, 
      Which with a yielding latch, and with no more, 
      Hath barred him from the blessed thing he sought. 
      So from himself impiety hath wrought, 
        That for his prey to pray he doth begin, 
        As if the heavens should countenance his sin.

      But in the midst of his unfruitful prayer, 
      Having solicited th' eternal power 
      That his foul thoughts might compass his fair fair, 
      And they would stand auspicious to the hour, 
      Even there he starts; quoth he 'I must deflower: 
        The powers to whom I pray abhor this fact; 
        How can they then assist me in the act?

      'Then Love and Fortune be my gods, my guide! 
      My will is backed with resolution. 
      Thoughts are but dreams.till their effects be tried; 
      The blackest sin is cleared with absolution; 
      Against love's fire fear's frost hath dissolution. 
        The eye of heaven is out, and misty night 
        Covers the shame that follows sweet delight.'

      This said, his guilty hand plucked up the latch, 
      And with his knee the door he opens wide. 
      The dove sleeps fast that this night-owl will catch. 
      Thus treason works ere traitors be espied. 
      Who sees the lurking serpent steps aside; 
        But she, sound sleeping, fearing no such thing, 
        Lies at the mercy of his mortal sting.

      Into the chamber wickedly he stalks 
      And gazeth on her yet unstained bed. 
      The curtains being close, about he walks, 
      Rolling his greedy eyeballs in his head. 
      By their high treason is his heart misled, 
        Which gives the watch-word to his hand full soon 
        To draw the cloud that hides the silver moon.

      Look as the fair and fiery-pointed sun, 
      Rushing from forth a cloud, bereaves our sight; 
      Even so, the curtain drawn, his eyes begun 
      To wink, being blinded with a greater light; 
      Whether it is that she reflects so bright 
        That dazzleth them, or else some shame supposed, 
        But blind they are, and keep themselves enclosed.

      O, had they in that darksome prison died! 
      Then had they seen the period of their ill; 
      Then Collatine again, by Lucrece' side, 
      In his clear bed might have reposed still; 
      But they must ope, this blessed league to kill; 
        And holy-thoughted Lucrece to their sight 
        Must sell her joy, her life, her world's delight.

      Her lily hand her rosy cheek lies under, 
      Coz'ning the pillow of a lawful kiss; 
      Who, therefore angry, seems to part in sunder, 
      Swelling on either side to want his bliss; 
      Between whose hills her head entombed is; 
        Where, like a virtuous monument, she lies, 
        To be admired of lewd unhallowed eyes.

      Without the bed her other fair hand was, 
      On the green coverlet; whose perfect white 
      Showed like an April daisy on the grass, 
      With pearly sweat resembling dew of night. 
      Her eyes, like marigolds, had sheathed their light, 
        And canopied in darkness sweetly lay, 
        Till they might open to adorn the day.

      Her hair, like golden threads, played with her breath- 
      O modest wantons! wanton modesty!- 
      Showing life's triumph in the map of death, 
      And death's dim look in life's mortality: 
      Each in her sleep themselves so beautify 
        As if between them, twain there were no strife, 
        But that life lived in death and death in life.

      Her breasts, like ivory globes circled with blue, 
      A pair of maiden worlds unconquered, 
      Save of their lord no bearing yoke they knew, 
      And him by oath they truly honoured. 
      These worlds in Tarquin new ambition bred, 
        Who like a foul usurper went about 
        From this fair throne to heave the owner out.

      What could he see but mightily he noted? 
      What did he note but strongly he desired? 
      What he beheld, on that he firmly doted, 
      And in his will his wilful eye he tired. 
      With more than admiration he admired 
        Her azure veins, her alabaster skin, 
        Her coral lips, her snow-white dimpled chin.

      As the grim lion fawneth o'er his prey, 
      Sharp hunger by the conquest satisfied, 
      So o'er this sleeping soul doth Tarquin stay, 
      His rage of lust by gazing qualified; 
      Slacked, not suppressed; for standing by her side, 
        His eye, which late this mutiny restrains, 
        Unto a greater uproar tempts his veins;

      And they, like straggling slaves for pillage fighting, 
      Obdurate vassals fell exploits effecting, 
      In bloody death and ravishment delighting, 
      Nor children's tears nor mothers' groans respecting, 
      Swell in their pride, the onset still expecting. 
        Anon his beating heart, alarum striking 
        Gives the hot charge, and bids them do their liking.

      His drumming heart cheers up his burning eye, 
      His eye commends the leading to his hand; 
      His hand, as proud of such a dignity, 
      Smoking with pride, marched on to make his stand 
      On her bare breast, the heart of all her land; 
        Whose ranks of blue veins as his hand did scale, 
        Left their round turrets destitute and pale.

      They, must'ring to the quiet cabinet 
      Where their dear governess and lady lies, 
      Do tell her she is dreadfully beset, 
      And fright her with confusion of their cries. 
      She, much amazed, breaks ope her locked-up eyes, 
        Who, peeping forth this tumult to behold, 
        Are by his flaming torch dimmed and controlled.

      Imagine her as one in dead of night 
      From forth dull sleep by dreadful fancy waking, 
      That thinks she hath beheld some ghastly sprite, 
      Whose grim aspect sets every joint a-shaking; 
      What terror 'tis! but she, in worser taking, 
        From sleep disturbed, heedfully doth view 
        The sight which makes supposed terror true.

      Wrapped and confounded in a thousand fears, 
      Like to a new-killed bird she trembling lies; 
      She dares not look; yet, winking, there appears 
      Quick-shifting antics, ugly in her eyes. 
      "Such shadows are the weak brain's forgeries, 
        Who, angry that the eyes fly from their lights, 
        In darkness daunts them with more dreadful sights.

      His hand that yet remains upon her breast- 
      Rude ram, to batter such an ivory wall!- 
      May feel her heart, poor citizen, distressed, 
      Wounding itself to death, rise up and fall, 
      Beating her bulk, that his hand shakes withal. 
        This moves in him more rage and lesser pity, 
        To make the breach and enter this sweet city.

      First like a trumpet doth his tongue begin 
      To sound a parley to his heartless foe, 
      Who o'er the white sheet peers her whiter chin, 
      The reason of this rash alarm to know, 
      Which he by dumb demeanour seeks to show; 
        But she with vehement prayers urgeth still 
        Under what colour he commits this ill.

      Thus he replies: 'The colour in thy face, 
      That even for anger makes the lily pale 
      And the red rose blush at her own disgrace, 
      Shall plead for me and tell my loving tale. 
      Under that colour am I come to scale 
        Thy never-conquered fort. The fault is thine, 
        For those thine eyes betray thee unto mine.

      'Thus I forestall thee, if thou mean to chide: 
      Thy beauty hath ensnared thee to this night, 
      Where thou with patience must my will abide, 
      My will that marks thee for my earth's delight, 
      Which I to conquer sought with all my might; 
        But as reproof and reason beat it dead, 
        By thy bright beauty was it newly bred.

      'I see what crosses my attempt will bring; 
      I know what thorns the growing rose defends; 
      I think the honey guarded with a sting; 
      All this beforehand counsel comprehends. 
      But will is deaf and hears no heedful friends; 
        Only he hath an eye to gaze on beauty, 
        And dotes on what he looks, 'gainst law or duty.

      'I have debated, even in my soul, 
      What wrong, what shame, what sorrow I shall breed; 
      But nothing can affection's course control, 
      Or stop the headlong fury of his speed. 
      I know repentant tears ensue the deed, 
        Reproach, disdain and deadly enmity; 
        Yet strive I to embrace mine infamy.'

      This said, he shakes aloft his Roman blade, 
      Which, like a falcon tow'ring in the skies, 
      Coucheth the fowl below with his wings' shade, 
      Whose crooked beak threats if he mount he dies. 
      So under his insulting falchion lies 
        Harmless Lucretia, marking what he tells 
        With trembling fear, as fowl hear falcons' bells.

      'Lucrece,' quoth he, 'this night I must enjoy thee. 
      If thou deny, then force must work my way, 
      For in thy bed I purpose to destroy thee; 
      That done, some worthless slave of thine I'll slay, 
      To kill thine honour with thy life's decay; 
        And in thy dead arms do I mean to place him, 
        Swearing I slew him, seeing thee embrace him.

      'So thy surviving husband shall remain 
      The scornful mark of every open eye; 
      Thy kinsmen hang their heads at this disdain, 
      Thy issue blurred with nameless bastardy; 
      And thou, the author of their obloquy, 
        Shalt have thy trespass cited up in rhymes 
        And sung by children in succeeding times.

      'But if thou yield, I rest thy secret friend: 
      The fault unknown is as a thought unacted; 
      "A little harm done to a great good end 
      For lawful policy remains enacted. 
      "The poisonous simple sometime is compacted 
        In a pure compound; being so applied, 
        His venom in effect is purified.

      'Then, for thy husband and thy children's sake, 
      Tender my suit; bequeath not to their lot 
      The shame that from them no device can take, 
      The blemish that will never be forgot; 
      Worse than a slavish wipe or birth-hour's blot; 
        For marks descried in men's nativity 
        Are nature's faults, not their own infamy.'

      Here with a cockatrice' dead-killing eye 
      He rouseth up himself, and makes a pause; 
      While she, the picture of pure piety, 
      Like a white hind under the gripe's sharp claws, 
      Pleads in a wilderness where are no laws 
        To the rough beast that knows no gentle right, 
        Nor aught obeys but his foul appetite.

      But when a black-faced cloud the world doth threat, 
      In his dim mist th' aspiring mountains hiding, 
      From earth's dark womb some gentle gust doth get, 
      Which blows these pitchy vapours from their biding, 
      Hind'ring their present fall by this dividing; 
        So his unhallowed haste her words delays, 
        And moody Pluto winks while Orpheus plays.

      Yet, foul night-waking cat, he doth but dally, 
      While in his hold-fast foot the weak mouse panteth; 
      Her sad behaviour feeds his vulture folly, 
      A swallowing gulf that even in plenty wanteth; 
      His ear her prayers admits, but his heart granteth 
        No penetrable entrance to her plaining. 
        "Tears harden lust, though marble wear with raining.

      Her pity-pleading eyes are sadly fixed 
      In the remorseless wrinkles of his face; 
      Her modest eloquence with sighs is mixed, 
      Which to her oratory adds more grace. 
      She puts the period often from his place, 
        And midst the sentence so her accent breaks 
        That twice she doth begin ere once she speaks.

      She conjures him by high almighty Jove, 
      By knighthood, gentry, and sweet friendship's oath, 
      By her untimely tears, her husband's love, 
      By holy human law and common troth, 
      By heaven and earth, and all the power of both, 
        That to his borrowed bed he make retire, 
        And stoop to honour, not to foul desire.

      Quoth she: 'Reward not hospitality 
      With such black payment as thou hast pretended; 
      Mud not the fountain that gave drink to thee; 
      Mar not the thing that cannot be amended; 
      End thy ill aim before thy shoot be ended. 
        He is no woodman that doth bend his bow 
        To strike a poor unseasonable doe.

      'My husband is thy friend-for his sake spare me; 
      Thyself art mighty-for thine own sake leave me; 
      Myself a weakling-do not then ensnare me; 
      Thou look'st not like deceit-do not deceive me. 
      My sighs like whirlwinds labour hence to heave thee. 
        If ever man were moved with woman's moans, 
        Be moved with my tears, my sighs, my groans;

      'All which together, like a troubled ocean, 
      Beat at thy rocky and wrack-threat'ning heart, 
      To soften it with their continual motion; 
      For stones dissolved to water do convert. 
      O, if no harder than a stone thou art, 
        Melt at my tears, and be compassionate! 
        Soft pity enters at an iron gate.

      'In Tarquin's likeness I did entertain thee; 
      Hast thou put on his shape to do him shame? 
      To all the host of heaven I complain me 
      Thou wrong'st his honour, wound'st his princely name. 
      Thou art not what thou seem'st; and if the same, 
        Thou seem'st not what thou art, a god, a king; 
        For kings, like gods should govern every thing.

      'How will thy shame be seeded in thine age, 
      When thus thy vices bud before thy spring? 
      If in thy hope thou dar'st do such outrage, 
      What dar'st thou not when once thou art a king? 
      O, be rememb'red, no outrageous thing 
        From vassal actors can be wiped away; 
        Then kings' misdeeds cannot be hid in clay.

      'This deed will make thee only loved for fear, 
      But happy monarchs still are feared for love; 
      With foul offenders thou perforce must bear, 
      When they in thee the like offences prove. 
      If but for fear of this, thy will remove; 
        For princes are the glass, the school, the book, 
        Where subjects' eyes do learn, do read, do look.

      'And wilt thou be the school where Lust shall learn? 
      Must he in thee read lectures of such shame? 
      Wilt thou be glass wherein it shall discern 
      Authority for sin, warrant for blame, 
      To privilege dishonour in thy name? 
        Thou back'st reproach against long-living laud, 
        And mak'st fair, reputation but a bawd.

      'Hast thou command? by him that gave it thee, 
      From a pure heart command thy rebel will; 
      Draw not thy sword to guard iniquity, 
      For it was lent thee all that brood to kill. 
      Thy princely office how canst thou fulfill, 
        When patterned by thy fault foul sin may say 
        He learned to sin, and thou didst teach the way?

      'Think but how vile a spectacle it were 
      To view thy present trespass in another. 
      Men's faults do seldom to themselves appear; 
      Their own transgressions partially they smother; 
      This guilt would seem death-worthy in thy brother. 
        O, how are they wrapped in with infamies 
        That from their own misdeeds askance their eyes!

      'To thee, to thee, my heaved-up hands, appeal, 
      Not to seducing lust, thy rash relier; 
      I sue for exiled majesty's repeal; 
      Let him return, and flatt'ring thoughts retire. 
      His true respect will prison false desire, 
        And wipe the dim mist from thy doting eyne, 
        That thou shalt see thy state and pity mine.'

      'Have done, quoth he, 'my uncontrolled tide 
      Turns not, but swells the higher by this let. 
      Small lights are soon blown out, huge fires abide, 
      And with the wind in greater fury fret. 
      The petty streams that pay a daily debt 
        To their salt sovereign, with their fresh falls' haste 
        Add to his flow, but alter not his taste.'

      'Thou art', quoth she, 'a sea, a sovereign king; 
      And, lo, there falls into thy boundless flood 
      Black lust, dishonour, shame, misgoverning, 
      Who seek to stain the ocean of thy blood. 
      If all these petty ills shall change thy good; 
        Thy sea within a puddle's womb is hearsed, 
        And not the puddle in thy sea dispersed.

      'So shall these slaves be king, and thou their slave; 
      Thou nobly base, they basely dignified; 
      Thou their fair life, and they thy fouler grave; 
      Thou loathed in their shame, they in thy pride. 
      The lesser thing should not the greater hide; 
        The cedar stoops not to the base shrub's foot, 
        But low shrubs wither at the cedar's root.

      'So let thy thoughts, low vassals to thy state- 
      "No more,' quoth he; 'by heaven, I will not hear thee. 
      Yield to my love; if not, enforced hate, 
      Instead of love's coy touch, shall rudely tear thee; 
      That done, despitefully I mean to bear thee 
        Unto the base bed of some rescal groom, 
        To be thy partner in this shameful doom.'

      This said, he sets his foot upon the light, 
      For light and lust are deadly enemies; 
      Shame folded up in blind concealing night, 
      When most unseen, then most doth tyrannize. 
      The wolf hath seized his prey, the poor lamb cries, 
        Till with her own white fleece her voice controlled 
        Entombs her outcry in her lips' sweet fold;

      For with the nightly linen that she wears 
      He pens her piteous clamours in her head, 
      Cooling his hot face in the chastest tears 
      That ever modest eyes with sorrow shed. 
      O, that prone lust should stain so pure a bed! 
        The spots whereof could weeping purify, 
        Her tears should drop on them perpetually.

      But she hath lost a dearer thing than life, 
      And he hath won what he would lose again. 
      This forced league doth force a further strife; 
      This momentary joy breeds months of pain; 
      This hot desire converts to cold disdain; 
        Pure Chastity is rifled of her store, 
        And Lust, the thief, far poorer than before.

      Look as the full-fed hound or gorged hawk, 
      Unapt for tender smell or speedy flight, 
      Make slow pursuit, or altogether balk 
      The prey wherein by nature they delight, 
      So surfeit-taking Tarquin fares this night: 
        His taste delicious, in digestion souring, 
        Devours his will, that lived by foul devouring.

      O, deeper sin than bottomless conceit 
      Can comprehend in still imagination! 
      Drunken Desire must vomit his receipt, 
      Ere he can see his own abomination. 
      While Lust is in his pride, no exclamation 
        Can curb his heat or rein his rash desire, 
        Till, like a jade, Self-will himself doth tire.

      And then with lank and lean discoloured cheek, 
      With heavy eye, knit brow, and strengthless pace, 
      Feeble Desire, all recreant, poor and meek, 
      Like to a bankrupt beggar wails his case: 
      The flesh being proud, Desire doth fight with Grace, 
        For there it revels, and when that decays 
        The guilty rebel for remission prays.

      So fares it with this faultful lord of Rome, 
      Who this accomplishment so hotly chased; 
      For now against himself he sounds this doom, 
      That through the length of times he stands disgraced; 
      Besides, his soul's fair temple is defaced, 
        To whose weak ruins muster troops of cares, 
        To ask the spotted princess how she fares.

      She says her subjects with foul insurrection 
      Have battered down her consecrated wall, 
      And by their mortal fault brought in subjection 
      Her immortality, and made her thrall 
      To living death and pain perpetual; 
        Which in her prescience she controlled still, 
        But her foresight could not forestall their will.

      Ev'n in this thought through the dark night he stealeth, 
      A captive victor that hath lost in gain; 
      Bearing away the wound that nothing healeth, 
      The scar that will, despite of cure, remain; 
      Leaving his spoil perplexed in greater pain. 
        She bears the load of lust he left behind, 
        And he the burden of a guilty mind.

      He like a thievish dog creeps sadly thence; 
      She like a wearied lamb lies panting there; 
      He scowls, and hates himself for his offence; 
      She, desperate, with her nails her flesh doth tear; 
      He faintly flies, sweating with guilty fear; 
        She stays, exclaiming on the direful night; 
        He runs, and chides his vanished, loathed delight.

      He thence departs a heavy convertite; 
      She there remains a hopeless castaway; 
      He in his speed looks for the morning light; 
      She prays she never may behold the day. 
      'For day', quoth she, 'night's scapes doth open lay, 
        And my true eyes have never practised how 
        To cloak offences with a cunning brow.

      'They think not but that every eye can see 
      The same disgrace which they themselves behold; 
      And therefore would they still in darkness be, 
      To have their unseen sin remain untold; 
      For they their guilt with weeping will unfold, 
        And grave, like water that doth eat in steel, 
        Upon my cheeks what helpless shame I feel.'

      Here she exclaims against repose and rest, 
      And bids her eyes hereafter still be blind. 
      She wakes her heart by beating on her breast, 
      And bids it leap from thence, where it may find 
      Some purer chest to close so pure a mind. 
        Frantic with grief thus breathes she forth her spite 
        Against the unseen secrecy of night:

      'O comfort-killing Night, image of hell! 
      Dim register and notary of shame! 
      Black stage for tragedies and murders fell! 
      Vast sin-concealing chaos! nurse of blame! 
      Blind muffled bawd! dark harbour for defame! 
        Grim cave of death! whisp'ring conspirator 
        With close-tongued treason and the ravisher!

      'O hateful, vaporous and foggy Night! 
      Since thou art guilty of my cureless crime, 
      Muster thy mists to meet the eastern light, 
      Make war against proportioned course of time; 
      Or if thou wilt permit the sun to climb 
        His wonted height, yet ere he go to bed, 
        Knit poisonous clouds about his golden head.

      'With rotten damps ravish the morning air; 
      Let their exhaled unwholesome breaths make sick 
      The life of purity, the supreme fair, 
      Ere he arrive his weary noon-tide prick; 
      And let thy musty vapours march so thick 
        That in their smoky ranks his smoth'red light 
        May set at noon and make perpetual night.

      'Were Tarquin Night, as he is but Night's child, 
      The silver-shining queen he would distain; 
      Her twinkling handmaids too, by him defiled, 
      Through Night's black bosom should not peep again; 
      So should I have co-partners in my pain; 
        And fellowship in woe doth woe assuage, 
        As palmers' chat makes short their pilgrimage.

      'Where now I have no one to blush with me, 
      To cross their arms and hang their heads with mine, 
      To mask their brows and hide their infamy; 
      But I alone alone sit and pine, 
      Seasoning the earth with show'rs of silver brine, 
        Mingling my talk with tears, my grief with groans, 
        Poor wasting monuments of lasting moans.

      'O Night, thou furnace of foul-reeking smoke, 
      Let not the jealous Day behold that face 
      Which underneath thy black all-hiding cloak 
      Immodestly lies martyred with disgrace! 
      Keep still possession of thy gloomy place, 
        That all the faults which in thy reign are made 
        May likewise be sepulchred in thy shade!

      'Make me not object to the tell-tale Day. 
      The light will show, charactered in my brow, 
      The story of sweet chastity's decay, 
      The impious breach of holy wedlock vow; 
      Yea, the illiterate, that know not how 
        To cipher what is writ in learned books, 
        Will quote my loathsome trespass in my looks.

      'The nurse, to still her child, will tell my story, 
      And fright her crying babe with Tarquin's name; 
      The orator, to deck his oratory, 
      Will couple my reproach to Tarquin's shame; 
      Feast-finding minstrels, tuning my defame, 
        Will tie the hearers to attend each line, 
        How Tarquin wronged me, I Collatine

      'Let my good name, that senseless reputation, 
      For Collatine's dear love be kept unspotted; 
      If that be made a theme for disputation, 
      The branches of another root are rotted, 
      And undeserved reproach to him allotted 
        That is as clear from this attaint of mine 
        As I ere this was pure to Collatine.

      'O unseen shame! invisible disgrace! 
      O unfelt sore! crest-wounding, private scar! 
      Reproach is stamped in Collatinus' face, 
      And Tarquin's eye may read the mot afar, 
      "How he in peace is wounded, not in war. 
        "Alas, how many bear such shameful blows, 
        Which not themselves, but he that gives them knows!

      'If, Collatine, thine honour lay in me, 
      From me by strong assault it is bereft. 
      My honey lost, and I, a drone-like bee, 
      Have no perfection of my summer left, 
      But robbed and ransacked by injurious theft. 
        In thy weak hive a wand'ring wasp hath crept, 
        And sucked the honey which thy chaste bee kept.

      'Yet am I guilty of thy honour's wrack; 
      Yet for thy honour did I entertain him; 
      Coming from thee, I could not put him back, 
      For it had been dishonour to disdain him; 
      Besides, of weariness he did complain him, 
        And talked of virtue: O unlooked-for evil, 
        When virtue is profaned in such a devil!

      'Why should the worm intrude the maiden bud? 
      Or hateful cuckoos hatch in sparrows' nests? 
      Or toads infect fair founts with venom mud? 
      Or tyrant folly lurk in gentle breasts? 
      Or kings be breakers of their own behests? 
        "But no perfection is so absolute 
        That some impurity doth not pollute.

      'The aged man that coffers up his gold 
      Is plagued with cramps and gouts and painful fits, 
      And scarce hath eyes his treasure to behold, 
      But like still-pining Tantalus he sits, 
      And useless barns the harvest of his wits, 
        Having no other pleasure of his gain 
        But torment that it cannot cure his pain.

      'So then he hath it when he cannot use it, 
      And leaves it to be mast'red by his young; 
      Who in their pride do presently abuse it. 
      Their father was too weak, and they strong, 
      To hold their cursed-blessed fortune long. 
        "The sweets we wish for turn to loathed sours 
        "Even in the moment that we call them ours.

      'Unruly blasts wait on the tender spring; 
      Unwholesome weeds take root with precious flowers: 
      The adder hisses where the sweet birds sing; 
      What virtue breeds iniquity devours. 
      We have no good that we can say is ours 
        But ill-annexed Opportunity 
        Or kills his life or else his quality.

      'O Opportunity, thy guilt is great! 
      'Tis thou that execut'st the traitor's treason; 
      Thou sets the wolf where he the lamb may get; 
      Whoever plots the sin, thou point'st the season; 
      'Tis thou that spurn'st at right, at law, at reason; 
        And in thy shady cell, where none may spy him, 
        Sits Sin, to seize the souls that wander by him.

      'Thou mak'st the vestal violate her oath; 
      Thou blow'st the fire when temperance is thawed; 
      Thou smother'st honesty, thou murd'rest troth; 
      Thou foul abettor! thou notorious bawd! 
      Thou plantest scandal and displacest laud. 
        Thou ravisher, thou traitor, thou false thief, 
        Thy honey turns to gall, thy joy to grief!

      'Thy secret pleasure turns to open shame, 
      Thy private feasting to a public fast, 
      Thy smoothing titles to a ragged name, 
      Thy sugared tongue to bitter wormwood taste; 
      Thy violent vanities can never last; 
        How comes it then, vile Opportunity, 
        Being so bad, such numbers seek for thee?

      'When wilt thou be the humble suppliant's friend, 
      And bring him where his suit may be obtained? 
      When wilt thou sort an hour great strifes to end? 
      Or free that soul which wretchedness hath chained? 
      Give physic to the sick, ease to the pained? 
        The poor, lame, blind, halt, creep, cry out for thee; 
        But they ne'er meet with Opportunity.

      'The patient dies while the physician sleeps; 
      The orphan pines while the oppressor feeds; 
      Justice is feasting while the widow weeps; 
      Advice is sporting while infection breeds; 
      Thou grant'st no time for charitable deeds; 
        Wrath, envy, treason, rape, and murder's rages, 
        Thy heinous hours wait on them as their pages.

      'When Truth and Virtue have to do with thee, 
      A thousand crosses keep them from thy aid; 
      They buy thy help, but Sin ne'er gives a fee; 
      He gratis comes, and thou art well appaid 
      As well to hear as grant what he hath said. 
        My Collatine would else have come to me 
        When Tarquin did, but he was stayed by thee.

      'Guilty thou art of murder and of theft, 
      Guilty of perjury and subornation, 
      Guilty of treason, forgery and shift, 
      Guilty of incest, that abomination; 
      An accessary by thine inclination 
        To all sins past and all that are to come, 
        From the creation to the general doom.

      'Misshapen Time, copesmate of ugly Night, 
      Swift subtle post, carrier of grisly care, 
      Eater of youth, false slave to false delight, 
      Base watch of woes, sin's pack-horse, virtue's snare; 
      Thou nursest all and murd'rest all that are. 
        O, hear me then, injurious, shifting Time! 
        Be guilty of my death, since of my crime.

      'Why hath thy servant Opportunity 
      Betrayed the hours thou gavest me to repose, 
      Cancelled my fortunes and enchained me 
      To endless date of never-ending woes? 
      Time's office is to fine the hate of foes, 
        To eat up errors by opinion bred, 
        Not spend the dowry of a lawful bed.

      'Time's glory is to calm contending kings, 
      To unmask falsehood and bring truth to light, 
      To stamp the seal of time in aged things, 
      To wake the morn and sentinel the night, 
      To wrong the wronger till he render right, 
        To ruinate proud buildings with thy hours 
        And smear with dust their glitt'ring golden towers;

      'To fill with worm-holes stately monuments, 
      To feed oblivion with decay of things, 
      To blot old books and alter their contents, 
      To pluck the quills from ancient ravens' wings, 
      To dry the old oak's sap and cherish springs, 
        To spoil antiquities of hammered steel 
        And turn the giddy round of Fortune's wheel;

      'To show the beldam daughters of her daughter, 
      To make the child a man, the man a child, 
      To slay the tiger that doth live by slaughter, 
      To tame the unicorn and lion wild, 
      To mock the subtle in themselves beguiled, 
        To cheer the ploughman with increased crops, 
        And waste huge stones with little water-drops.

      'Why work'st thou mischief in thy pilgrimage, 
      Unless thou couldst return to make amends? 
      One poor retiring minute in an age 
      Would purchase thee a thousand thousand friends, 
      Lending him wit that to bad debtors lends. 
        O, this dread night, wouldst thou one hour come back, 
        I could prevent this storm and shun thy wrack!

      'Thou ceaseless lackey to eternity, 
      With some mischance cross Tarquin in his flight; 
      Devise extremes beyond extremity, 
      To make him curse this cursed crimeful night; 
      Let ghastly shadows his lewd eyes affright, 
        And the dire thought of his committed evil 
        Shape every bush a hideous shapeless devil.

      'Disturb his hours of rest with restless trances, 
      Afflict him in his bed with bedrid groans; 
      Let there bechance him pitiful mischances, 
      To make him moan, but pity not his moans. 
      Stone him with hard'ned hearts, harder than stones; 
        And let mild, women to him lose their mildness, 
        Wilder to him than tigers in their wildness.

      'Let him have time to tear his curled hair, 
      Let him have time against himself to rave, 
      Let him have time of time's help to despair, 
      Let him have time to live a loathed slave, 
      Let him have time a beggar's orts to crave, 
        And time to see one that by alms doth live 
        Disdain to him disdained scraps to give.

      'Let him have time to see his friends his foes, 
      And merry fools to mock at him resort; 
      Let him have time to mark how slow time goes 
      In time of sorrow, and how swift and short 
      His time of folly and his time of sport; 
        And ever let his unrecalling crime 
        Have time to wail th' abusing of his time.

      'O Time, thou tutor both to good and bad, 
      Teach me to curse him that thou taught'st this ill! 
      At his own shadow let the thief run mad, 
      Himself himself seek every hour to kill! 
      Such wretched hands such -wretched blood should spill; 
        For who so base would such an office have 
        As sland'rous deathsman to so base a slave?

      'The baser is he, coming from a king, 
      To shame his hope with deeds degenerate. 
      The mightier man, the mightier is the thing 
      That makes him honoured or begets him hate; 
      For greatest scandal waits on greatest state. 
        The moon being clouded presently is missed, 
        But little stars may hide them when they list.

      'The crow may bathe his coal-black wings in mire 
      And unperceived fly with the filth away; 
      But if the like the snow-white swan desire, 
      The stain upon his silver down will stay. 
      Poor grooms are sightless night, kings glorious day. 
        Gnats are unnoted wheresoe'er they fly, 
        But eagles gazed upon with every eye.

      'Out, idle words, servants to shallow fools! 
      Unprofitable sounds, weak arbitrators! 
      Busy yourselves in skill-contending schools; 
      Debate where leisure serves with dull debaters; 
      To trembling clients be you mediators. 
        For me, I force not argument a straw, 
        Since that my case is past the help of law.

      'In vain I rail at Opportunity, 
      At Time, at Tarquin, and uncheerful Night; 
      In vain I cavil with mine infamy, 
      In vain I spurn at my confirmed despite: 
      This helpless smoke of words doth me no right. 
        The remedy indeed to do me good 
        Is to let forth my foul-defiled blood.

      'Poor hand, why quiver'st thou at this decree? 
      Honour thyself to rid me of this shame; 
      For if I die, my honour lives in thee, 
      But if I live, thou livest in my defame. 
      Since thou couldst not defend thy loyal dame 
        And wast afeard to scratch her wicked foe, 
        Kill both thyself and her for yielding so.'

      This said, from her betumbled couch she starteth, 
      To find some desp'rate instrument of death. 
      But this no slaughterhouse no tool imparteth 
      To make more vent for passage of her breath, 
      Which, thronging through her lips, so vanisheth 
        As smoke from Etna that in air consumes, 
        Or that which from discharged cannon fumes.

      'In vain,' quoth she, 'I live, and seek in vain 
      Some happy mean to end a hapless life. 
      I feared by Tarquin's falchion to be slain, 
      Yet for the selfsame purpose seek a knife; 
      But when I feared I was a loyal wife; 
        So am I now-O no, that cannot be; 
        Of that true type hath Tarquin rifled me.

      'O, that is gone for which I sought to live, 
      And therefore now I need not fear to die. 
      To clear this spot by death, at least I give 
      A badge of fame to slander's livery, 
      A dying life to living infamy. 
        Poor helpless help, the treasure stol'n away, 
        To burn the guiltless casket where it lay!

      'Well, well, dear Collatine, thou shalt not know 
      The stained taste of violated troth; 
      I will not wrong thy true affection so, 
      To flatter thee with an infringed oath; 
      This bastard graff shall never come to growth; 
        He shall not boast who did thy stock pollute 
        That thou art doting father of his fruit.

      'Nor shall he smile at thee in secret thought, 
      Nor laugh with his companions at thy state; 
      But thou shalt know thy int'rest was not bought 
      Basely with gold, but stol'n from forth thy gate. 
      For me, I am the mistress of my fate, 
        And with my trespass never will dispense, 
        Till life to death acquit my forced offence.

      'I will not poison thee with my attaint, 
      Nor fold my fault in cleanly-coined excuses; 
      My sable ground of sin I will not paint 
      To hide the truth of this false night's abuses. 
      My tongue shall utter all; mine eyes, like sluices, 
        As from a mountain-spring that feeds a dale, 
        Shall gush pure streams to purge my impure tale.'

      By this, lamenting Philomel had ended 
      The well-tuned warble of her nightly sorrow, 
      And solemn night with slow sad gait descended 
      To ugly hell; when lo, the blushing morrow 
      Lends light to all fair eyes that light will borrow; 
        But cloudy Lucrece shames herself to see, 
        And therefore still in night would cloist'red be.

      Revealing day through every cranny spies, 
      And seems to point her out where she sits weeping; 
      To whom she sobbing speaks: 'O eye of eyes, 
      Why pry'st thou through my window? leave thy peeping; 
      Mock with thy tickling beams eyes that are sleeping; 
        Brand not my forehead with thy piercing light, 
        For day hath nought to do what's done by night.'

      Thus cavils she with every thing she sees. 
      True grief is fond and testy as a child, 
      Who wayward once, his mood with nought agrees. 
      Old woes, not infant sorrows, bear them mild; 
      Continuance tames the one; the other wild, 
        Like an unpractised swimmer plunging still 
        With too much labour drowns for want of skill.

      So she, deep-drenched in a sea of care, 
      Holds disputation with each thing she views, 
      And to herself all sorrow doth compare; 
      No object but her passion's strength renews, 
      And as one shifts, another straight ensues. 
        Sometime her grief is dumb and hath no words; 
        Sometime 'tis mad and too much talk affords.

      The little birds that tune their morning's joy 
      Make her moans mad with their sweet melody; 
      "For mirth doth search the bottom of annoy; 
      "Sad souls are slain in merry company; 
      "Grief best is pleased with grief's society 
        True sorrow then is feelingly sufficed 
        When with like semblance it is sympathized.

      "'Tis double death to drown in ken of shore; 
      "He ten times pines that pines beholding food; 
      "To see the salve doth make the wound ache more; 
      "Great grief grieves most at that would do it good; 
      "Deep woes roll forward like a gentle flood, 
        Who, being stopped, the bounding banks o'erflows; 
        Grief dallied with nor law nor limit knows.

      'You mocking birds,' quoth she, your tunes entomb 
      Within your hollow-swelling feathered breasts, 
      And in my hearing be you mute and dumb. 
      My restless discord loves no stops nor rests; 
      "A woeful hostess brooks not merry guests. 
        Relish your nimble notes to pleasing ears; 
        "Distress likes dumps when time is kept with tears.

      'Come, Philomel, that sing'st of ravishment, 
      Make thy sad grove in my dishevelled hair. 
      As the dank earth weeps at thy languishment, 
      So I at each sad strain will strain a tear, 
      And with deep groans the diapason bear; 
        For burden-wise I'll hum on Tarquin still, 
        While thou on Tereus descants better skill.

      'And whiles against a thorn thou bear'st thy part 
      To keep thy sharp woes waking, wretched I, 
      To imitate thee well, against my heart 
      Will fix a sharp knife to affright mine eye; 
      Who, if it wink, shall thereon fall and die. 
        These means, as frets upon an instrument, 
        Shall tune our heart-strings to true languishment.

      'And for, poor bird, thou sing'st not in the day, 
      As shaming any eye should thee behold, 
      Some dark deep desert, seated from the way, 
      That knows not parching heat nor freezing cold, 
      Will we find out; and there we will unfold 
        To creatures stern sad tunes, to change their kinds. 
        Since men prove beasts, let beasts bear gentle minds.'

      As the poor frighted deer, that stands at gaze, 
      Wildly determining which way to fly, 
      Or one encompassed with a winding maze 
      That cannot tread the way out readily; 
      So with herself is she in mutiny, 
        To live or die which of the twain were better, 
        When life is shamed and death reproach's debtor.

      'To kill myself,' quoth she, 'alack, what were it, 
      But with my body my poor soul's pollution? 
      They that lose half with greater patience bear it 
      Than they whose whole is swallowed in confusion. 
      That mother tries a merciless conclusion 
        Who, having two sweet babes, when death takes one, 
        Will slay the other and be nurse to none.

      'My body or my soul, which was the dearer, 
      When the one pure, the other made divine? 
      Whose love of either to myself was nearer, 
      When both were kept for heaven and Collatine? 
      Ay me! the bark pilled from the lofty pine, 
        His leaves will wither and his sap decay; 
        So must my soul, her bark being pilled away.

      'Her house is sacked, her quiet interrupted, 
      Her mansion battered by the enemy; 
      Her sacred temple spotted, spoiled, corrupted, 
      Grossly engirt with daring infamy; 
      Then let it not be called impiety 
        If in this blemished fort I make some hole 
        Through which I may convey this troubled soul.

      'Yet die I will not till my Collatine 
      Have heard the cause of my untimely death, 
      That he may vow, in that sad hour of mine, 
      Revenge on him that made me stop my breath. 
      My stained blood to Tarquin I'll bequeath, 
        Which by him tainted shall for him be spent, 
        And as his due writ in my testament.

      'My honour I'll bequeath unto the knife 
      That wounds my body so dishonoured. 
      'Tis honour to deprive dishonoured life; 
      The one will live, the other being dead. 
      So of shame's ashes shall my fame be bred; 
        For in my death I murder shameful scorn. 
        My shame so dead, mine honour is new born.

      'Dear lord of that dear jewel I have lost, 
      What legacy shall I bequeath to thee? 
      My resolution, love, shall be thy boast, 
      By whose example thou revenged mayst be. 
      How Tarquin must be used, read it in me: 
        Myself, thy friend, will kill myself, thy foe, 
        And, for my sake, serve thou false Tarquin so.

      'This brief abridgement of my will I make: 
      My soul and body to the skies and ground; 
      My resolution, husband, do thou take; 
      Mine honour be the knife's that makes my wound; 
      My shame be his that did my fame confound; 
        And all my fame that lives disbursed be 
        To those that live and think no shame of me.

      'Thou, Collatine, shalt oversee this will; 
      How was I overseen that thou shalt see it! 
      My blood shall wash the slander of mine ill; 
      My life's foul deed, my life's fair end shall free it. 
      Faint not, faint heart, but stoutly say "So be it". 
        Yield to my hand; my hand shall conquer thee; 
        Thou dead, both die and both shall victors be.'

      This plot of death when sadly she had laid, 
      And wiped the brinish pearl from her bright eyes, 
      With untuned tongue she hoarsely calls her maid, 
      Whose swift obedience to her mistress hies; 
      "For fleet-winged duty with thought's feathers flies. 
        Poor Lucrece' cheeks unto her maid seem so 
        As winter meads when sun doth melt their snow.

      Her mistress she doth give demure good-morrow 
      With soft slow tongue, true mark of modesty, 
      And sorts a sad look to her lady's sorrow, 
      For why her face wore sorrow's livery, 
      But durst not ask of her audaciously 
        Why her two suns were cloud-eclipsed so, 
        Nor why her fair cheeks over-washed with woe.

      But as the earth doth weep, the sun being set, 
      Each flower moist'ned like a melting eye, 
      Even so the maid with swelling drops 'gan wet 
      Her circled eyne, enforced by sympathy 
      Of those fair suns set in her mistress' sky, 
        Who in a salt-waved ocean quench their light, 
        Which makes the maid weep like the dewy night.

      A pretty while these pretty creatures stand, 
      Like ivory conduits coral cisterns filling. 
      One justly weeps; the other takes in hand 
      No cause but company of her drops spilling: 
      Their gentle sex to weep are often willing, 
        Grieving themselves to guess at others' smarts, 
        And then they drown their eyes or break their hearts.

      For men have marble, women waxen, minds, 
      And therefore are they formed as marble will; 
      The weak oppressed, th' impression of strange kinds 
      Is formed in them by force, by fraud, or skill. 
      Then call them not the authors of their ill, 
        No more than wax shall be accounted evil 
        Wherein is stamped the semblance of a devil.

      Their smoothness, like a goodly champaign plain, 
      Lays open all the little worms that creep; 
      In men, as in a rough-grown grove, remain 
      Cave-keeping evils that obscurely sleep. 
      Through crystal walls each little mote will peep. 
        Though men can cover crimes with bold stern looks, 
        Poor women's faces are their own faults' books.

      No man inveigh against the withered flower, 
      But chide rough winter that the flower hath killed. 
      Not that devoured, but that which doth devour, 
      Is worthy blame. O, let it not be hild 
      Poor women's faults that they are so fulfilled 
        With men's abuses: those proud lords to blame 
        Make weak-made women tenants to' their shame.

      The precedent whereof in Lucrece view, 
      Assailed by night with circumstances strong 
      Of present death, and shame that might ensue 
      By that her death, to do her husband wrong. 
      Such danger to resistance did belong, 
        That dying fear through all her body spread; 
        And who cannot abuse a body dead?

      By this, mild patience bid fair Lucrece speak 
      To the poor counterfeit of her complaining. 
      'My girl,' quoth she, 'on what occasion break 
      Those tears from thee that down thy cheeks are raining? 
      If thou dost weep for grief of my sustaining, 
        Know, gentle wench, it small avails my mood; 
        If tears could help, mine own would do me good.

      'But tell me, girl, when went'-and there she stayed 
      Till after a deep groan-'Tarquin from hence?' 
      'Madam, ere I was up,' replied the maid, 
      'The more to blame my sluggard negligence. 
      Yet with the fault I thus far can dispense: 
        Myself was stirring ere the break of day, 
        And ere I rose was Tarquin gone away.

      'But, lady, if your maid may be so bold, 
      She would request to know your heaviness.' 
      'O, peace!' quoth Lucrece: 'if it should be told, 
      The repetition cannot make it less, 
      For more it is than I can well express; 
        And that deep torture may be called a hell 
        When more is felt than one hath power to tell.

      'Go, get me hither paper, ink and pen; 
      Yet save that labour, for I have them here. 
      What should I say? One of my husband's men 
      Bid thou be ready by and by to bear 
      A letter to my lord, my love, my dear. 
        Bid him with speed prepare to carry it; 
        The cause craves haste and it will soon be writ.'

      Her maid is gone, and she prepares to write, 
      First hovering o'er the paper with her quill. 
      Conceit and grief an eager combat fight; 
      What wit sets down is blotted straight with will; 
      This is too curious-good, this blunt and ill: 
        Much like a press of people at a door, 
        Throng her inventions, which shall go before.

      At last she thus begins: 'Thou worthy lord 
      Of that unworthy wife that greeteth thee, 
      Health to thy person! next vouchsafe t'afford- 
      If ever, love, thy Lucrece thou wilt see- 
      Some present speed to come and visit me. 
        So I commend me, from our house in grief; 
        My woes are tedious, though my words are brief.'

      Here folds she up the tenor of her woe, 
      Her certain sorrow writ uncertainly. 
      By this short schedule Collatine may know 
      Her grief, but not her grief's true quality; 
      She dares not thereof make discovery, 
        Lest he should hold it her own gross abuse, 
        Ere she with blood had stained her stained excuse.

      Besides, the life and feeling of her passion 
      She hoards, to spend when he is by to hear her, 
      When sighs and groans and tears may grace the fashion 
      Of her disgrace, the better so to clear her 
      From that suspicion which the world might bear her. 
        To shun this blot, she would not blot the letter 
        With words, till action might become them better.

      To see sad sights moves more than hear them told; 
      For then the eye interprets to the car 
      The heavy motion that it doth behold, 
      When every part a part of woe doth bear. 
      'Tis but a part of sorrow that we hear: 
        Deep sounds make lesser noise than shallow fords, 
        And sorrow ebbs, being blown with wind of words.

      Her letter now is sealed and on it writ 
      'At Ardea to my lord with more than haste.' 
      The post attends, and she delivers it, 
      Charging the sour-faced groom to hie as fast 
      As lagging fowls before the northern blast. 
        Speed more than speed but dull and slow she deems: 
        Extremity still urgeth such extremes.

      The homely villain curtsies to her low, 
      And blushing on her, with a steadfast eye 
      Receives the scroll without or yea or no, 
      And forth with bashful innocence doth hie. 
      But they whose guilt within their bosoms lie 
        Imagine every eye beholds their blame; 
        For Lucrece thought he blushed to see her shame:

      When, silly groom, God wot, it was defect 
      Of spirit, life and bold audacity. 
      Such harmless creatures have a true respect 
      To talk in deeds, while others saucily 
      Promise more speed but do it leisurely. 
        Even so this pattern of the worn-out age 
        Pawned honest looks, but laid no words to gage.

      His kindled duty kindled her mistrust, 
      That two red fires in both their faces blazed; 
      She thought he blushed, as knowing Tarquin's lust, 
      And blushing with him, wistly on him gazed; 
      Her earnest eye did make him more amazed; 
        The more she saw the blood his cheeks replenish, 
        The more she thought he spied in her some blemish.

      But long she thinks till he return again, 
      And yet the duteous vassal scarce is gone. 
      The weary time she cannot entertain, 
      For now 'tis stale to sigh, to weep and groan; 
      So woe hath wearied woe, moan tired moan, 
        That she her plaints a little while doth stay, 
        Pausing for means to mourn some newer way.

      At last she calls to mind where hangs a piece 
      Of skilful painting, made for Priam's Troy, 
      Before the which is drawn the power of Greece, 
      For Helen's rape the city to destroy, 
      Threat'ning cloud-kissing Ilion with annoy; 
        Which the conceited painter drew so proud 
        As heaven, it seemed, to kiss the turrets bowed.

      A thousand lamentable objects there, 
      In scorn of nature, art gave lifeless life: 
      Many a dry drop seemed a weeping tear, 
      Shed for the slaught'red husband by the wife; 
      The red blood reeked, to show the painter's strife; 
        And dying eyes gleamed forth their ashy lights, 
        Like dying coals burnt out in tedious nights.

      There might you see the labouring pioneer 
      Begrimed with sweat and smeared all with dust; 
      And from the towers of Troy there would appear 
      The very eyes of men through loop-holes thrust, 
      Gazing upon the Greeks with little lust. 
        Such sweet observance in this work was had 
        That one might see those far-off eyes look sad.

      In great commanders grace and majesty 
      You might behold, triumphing in their faces; 
      In youth, quick bearing and dexterity; 
      And here and there the painter interlaces 
      Pale cowards marching on with trembling paces, 
        Which heartless peasants did so well resemble 
        That one would swear he saw them quake and tremble.

      In Ajax and Ulysses, O what art 
      Of physiognomy might one behold! 
      The face of either ciphered either's heart; 
      Their face their manners most expressly told: 
      In Ajax's eyes blunt rage and rigour rolled; 
        But the mild glance that sly Ulysses lent 
        Showed deep regard and smiling government.

      There pleading might you see grave Nestor stand, 
      As 'twere encouraging the Greeks to fight, 
      Making such sober action with his hand 
      That it beguiled attention, charmed the sight. 
      In speech, it seemed, his beard all silver white 
        Wagged up and down, and from his lips did fly 
        Thin winding breath which purled up to the sky.

      About him were a press of gaping fades, 
      Which seemed to swallow up his sound advice, 
      All jointly list'ning, but with several graces, 
      As if some mermaid did their ears entice, 
      Some high, some low, the painter was so nice; 
        The scalps of many, almost hid behind, 
        To jump up higher seemed, to mock the mind.

      Here one man's hand leaned on another's head, 
      His nose being shadowed by his neighbour's ear; 
      Here one being thronged bears back, all boll'n and red; 
      Another smothered seems to pelt and swear; 
      And in their rage such signs, of rage of rage they bear 
        As, but for loss of Nestor's golden words, 
        It seemed they would debate with angry swords.

      For much imaginary work was there; 
      Conceit deceitful, so compact, so kind, 
      That for Achilles' image stood his spear 
      Griped in an armed hand; himself behind 
      Was left unseen, save to the eye of mind: 
        A hand, a foot, a face, a leg, a head, 
        Stood for the whole to be imagined.

      And from the walls of strong-besieged Troy 
      When their brave hope, bold Hector, marched to field, 
      Stood many Trojan mothers sharing joy 
      To see their youthful sons bright weapons wield; 
      And to their hope they such odd action yield 
        That through their light joy seemed to appear, 
        Like bright things stained, a kind of heavy fear.

      And from the strand of Dardan where they fought 
      To Simois' reedy banks the red blood ran, 
      Whose waves to imitate the battle sought 
      With swelling ridges; and their ranks began 
      To break upon the galled shore, and than 
        Retire again, till meeting greater ranks 
        They join and shoot their foam at Simois' banks.

      To this well-painted piece is Lucrece come, 
      To find a face where all distress is stelled. 
      Many she sees where cares have carved some, 
      But none where all distress and dolour dwelled, 
      Till she despairing Hecuba beheld, 
        Staring on Priam's wounds with her old eyes, 
        Which bleeding under Pyrrhus' proud foot lies.

      In her the painter had anatomized 
      Time's ruin, beauty's wrack, and grim care's reign; 
      Her cheeks with chaps and wrinkles were disguised; 
      Of what she was no semblance did remain; 
      Her blue blood changed to black in every vein, 
        Wanting the spring that those shrunk pipes had fed, 
        Showed life imprisoned in a body dead.

      On this sad shadow Lucrece spends her eyes, 
      And shapes her sorrow to the beldam's woes, 
      Who nothing wants to answer her but cries, 
      And bitter words to ban her cruel foes: 
      The painter was no god to lend her those; 
        And therefore Lucrece swears he did her wrong, 
        To give her so much grief and not a tongue.

      'Poor instrument', quoth she, 'without a sound, 
      I'll tune thy woes with my lamenting tongue, 
      And drop sweet balm in Priam's painted wound, 
      And rail on Pyrrhus that hath done him wrong, 
      And with my tears quench Troy that burns so long, 
        And with my knife scratch out the angry eyes 
        Of all the Greeks that are thine enemies.

      'Show me the strumpet that began this stir, 
      That with my nails her beauty I may tear. 
      Thy heat of lust, fond Paris, did incur 
      This load of wrath that burning Troy doth bear. 
      Thy eye kindled the fire that burneth here; 
        And here in Troy, for trespass of thine eye, 
        The sire, the son, the dame and daughter die.

      'Why should the private pleasure of some one 
      Become the public plague of many moe? 
      Let sin, alone committed, light alone 
      Upon his head that hath transgressed so; 
      Let guiltless souls be freed from guilty woe. 
        For one's-offence why should so many fall, 
        To plague a private sin in general?

      'Lo, here weeps Hecuba, here Priam dies, 
      Here manly Hector faints, here Troilus swounds, 
      Here friend by friend in bloody channel lies, 
      And friend to friend gives unadvised wounds, 
      And one man's lust these many lives confounds. 
        Had doting Priam checked his son's desire, 
        Troy had been bright with fame and not with fire.'

      Here feelingly she weeps Troy's painted woes; 
      For sorrow, like a heavy-hanging bell 
      Once set on ringing, with his own weight goes; 
      Then little strength rings out the dolefull knell; 
      So Lucrece, set a-work, sad tales doth tell 
        To pencilled pensiveness and coloured sorrow; 
        She lends them words, and she their looks doth borrow.

      She throws her eyes about the painting round, 
      And who she finds forlorn she doth lament. 
      At last she sees a wretched image bound 
      That piteous looks to Phrygian shepherds lent; 
      His face,.though full of cares, yet showed content; 
        Onward to Troy with the blunt swains he goes, 
        So mild that Patience seemed to scorn his woes.

      In him the painter laboured with his skill 
      To hide deceit and give the harmless show 
      An humble gait, calm looks, eyes wailing still, 
      A brow unbent that seemed to welcome woe; 
      Cheeks neither red nor pale, but mingled so 
        That blushing red no guilty instance gave, 
        Nor ashy pale the fear that false hearts have.

      But, like a constant and confirmed devil, 
      He entertained a show so seeming just, 
      And therein so ensconced his secret evil, 
      That jealousy itself could not mistrust 
      False creeping craft and perjury should thrust 
        Into so bright a day such black-faced storms, 
        Or blot with hell-born sin such saint-like forms.

      The well-skilled workman this mild image drew 
      For perjured Sinon, whose enchanting story 
      The credulous old Priam after slew; 
      Whose words, like wildfire, burnt the shining glory 
      Of rich-built Ilion, that the skies were sorry, 
        And little stars shot from their fixed places, 
        When their glass fell wherein they viewed their faces.

      This picture she advisedly perused, 
      And chid the painter for his wondrous skill, 
      Saying, some shape in Sinon's was abused; 
      So fair a form lodged not a mind so ill; 
      And still on him she gazed, and gazing still 
        Such signs of truth in his plain face she spied 
        That she concludes the picture was belied.

      'It cannot be', quoth she, 'that so much guile'- 
      She would have said 'can lurk in such a look'; 
      But Tarquin's shape came in her mind the while, 
      And from her tongue 'can lurk' from 'cannot' took; 
      'It cannot be' she in that sense forsook, 
        And turned it thus, 'It cannot be, I find, 
        But such a face should bear a wicked mind;

      'For even as subtle Sinon here is painted, 
      So sober-sad, so weary and so mild, 
      As if with grief or travail he had fainted, 
      To me came Tarquin armed to beguild 
      With outward honesty, but yet defiled 
        With inward vice. As Priam him did cherish, 
        So did I Tarquin; so my Troy did perish.

      Look, look, how list'ning Priam wets his eyes, 
      To see those borrowed tears that Sinon sheds. 
      Priam, why art thou old and yet not wise? 
      For every tear he falls a Trojan bleeds; 
      His eye drops fire, no water thence proceeds; 
        Those round clear pearls of his that move thy pity 
        Are balls of quenchless fire to burn thy city.

      'Such devils steal effects from lightless hell; 
      For Sinon in his fire doth quake with cold, 
      And in that cold hot-burning fire doth dwell; 
      These contraries such unity do hold 
      Only to flatter fools and make them bold; 
        So Priam's trust false Sinon's tears doth flatter 
        That he finds means to burn his Troy with water.'

      Here, all enraged, such passion her assails, 
      That patience is quite beaten from her breast. 
      She tears the senseless Sinon with her nails, 
      Comparing him to that unhappy guest 
      Whose deed hath made herself herself 
        At last she smilingly with this gives o'er: 
        'Fool, fool!' quoth she, 'his wounds will not be sore.'

      Thus ebbs and flows the current of her sorrow, 
      And time doth weary time with her complaining. 
      She looks for night, and then she longs for morrow, 
      And both she thinks too long with her remaining. 
      Short time seems long in sorrow's sharp sustaining; 
        Though woe be heavy, yet it seldom sleeps, 
        And they that watch see time how slow it creeps.

      Which all this time hath overslipped her thought 
      That she with painted images hath spent, 
      Being from the feeling of her own grief brought 
      By deep surmise of others' detriment, 
      Losing her woes in shows of discontent. 
        It easeth some, though none it ever cured, 
        To think their dolour others have endured.

      But now the mindful messenger come back 
      Brings home his lord and other company; 
      Who finds his Lucrece clad in mourning black, 
      And round about her tear-distained eye 
      Blue circles streamed, like rainbows in the sky. 
        These water-galls in her dim element 
        Foretell new storms to those already spent.

      Which when her sad-beholding husband saw, 
      Amazedly in her sad face he stares: 
      Her eyes, though sod in tears, looked red and raw, 
      Her lively colour killed with deadly cares. 
      He hath no power to ask her how she fares; 
        Both stood, like old acquaintance in a trance, 
        Met far from home, wond'ring each other's chance.

      At last he takes her by the bloodless hand, 
      And thus begins: 'What uncouth ill event 
      Hath thee befall'n. that thou dost trembling stand? 
      Sweet love, what spite hath thy fair colour spent? 
      Why art thou thus attired in discontent? 
        Unmask, dear dear, this moody heaviness, 
        And tell thy grief, that we may give redress.'

      Three times with sighs she gives her sorrow fire 
      Ere once she can discharge one word of woe; 
      At length addressed to answer his desire, 
      She modestly prepares to let them know 
      Her honour is ta'en prisoner by the foe; 
        While Collatine and his consorted lords 
        With sad attention long to hear her words.

      And now this pale swan in her wat'ry nest 
      Begins the sad dirge of her certain ending. 
      'Few words', quoth she, 'shall fit the trespass best, 
      Where no excuse can give the fault amending: 
      In me moe woes than words are now depending; 
        And my laments would be drawn out too long, 
        To tell them all with one poor tired tongue.

      'Then be this all the task it hath to say: 
      Dear husband, in the interest of thy bed 
      A stranger came, and on that pillow lay 
      Where thou wast wont to rest thy weary head; 
      And what wrong else may be imagined 
        By foul enforcement might be done to me, 
        From that, alas, thy Lucrece is not free.

      'For in the dreadful dead of dark midnight, 
      With shining falchion in my chamber came: 
      A creeping creature with a flaming light, 
      And softly cried "Awake, thou Roman dame, 
      And entertain my love; else lasting shame 
        On thee and thine this night I will inflict, 
        If thou my love's desire do contradict.

      "'For some hard-favoured groom of thine," quoth he, 
      "Unless thou yoke thy liking to my will, 
      I'll murder straight, and then I'll slaughter thee, 
      And swear I found you where you did fulfill 
      The loathsome act of lust, and so did kill 
        The lechers in their deed: this act will be 
        My fame, and thy perpetual infamy."

      'With this, I did begin to start and cry, 
      And then against my heart he set his sword, 
      Swearing, unless I took all patiently, 
      I should not live to speak another word; 
      So should my shame still rest upon record, 
        And never be forgot in mighty Rome 
        Th' adulterate death of Lucrece and her groom.

      'Mine enemy was strong, my poor self weak, 
      And far the weaker with so strong a fear. 
      My bloody judge forbade my tongue to speak; 
      No rightful plea might plead for justice there. 
      His scarlet lust came evidence to swear 
        That my poor beauty had purloined his eyes, 
        And when the judge is robbed, the prisoner dies.

      'O, teach me how to make mine own excuse! 
      Or, at the least, this refuge let me find: 
      Though my gross blood be stained with this abuse, 
      Immaculate and spotless is my mind; 
      That was not forced; that never was inclined 
        To accessary yieldings, but still pure 
        Doth in her poisoned closet yet endure.'

      Lo, here, the hopeless merchant of this loss, 
      With head declined, and voice damned up with woe, 
      With sad-set eyes and wreathed arms across, 
      From lips new waxen pale begins to blow 
      The grief away that stops his answer so; 
        But, wretched as he is, he strives in vain; 
        What he breathes out his breath drinks up again.

      As through an arch the violent roaring tide 
      Outruns the eye that doth behold his haste, 
      Yet in the eddy boundeth in his pride 
      Back to the strait that forced him on so fast, 
      In rage sent out, recalled in rage, being past; 
        Even so his sighs, his sorrows, make a saw, 
        To push grief on and back the same grief draw.

      Which speechless woe of his poor she attendeth 
      And his untimely frenzy thus awaketh: 
      'Dear lord, thy sorrow to my sorrow lendeth 
      Another power; no flood by raining slaketh. 
      My woe too sensible thy passion maketh 
        More feeling-painful. Let it then suffice 
        To drown one woe, one pair of weeping eyes.

      'And for my sake, when I might charm thee so, 
      For she that was thy Lucrece, now attend me: 
      Be suddenly revenged on my foe, 
      Thine, mine, his own; suppose thou dost defend me 
      From what is past. The help that thou shalt lend me 
        Comes all too late, yet let the traitor die; 
        "For sparing justice feeds iniquity.

      'But ere I name him, you fair lords', quoth she, 
      Speaking to those that came with Collatine, 
      'Shall plight your honourable faiths to me, 
      With swift pursuit to venge this wrong of mine; 
      For 'tis a meritorious fair design 
        To chase injustice with revengeful arms: 
        Knights, by their oaths, should right poor ladies' harms.'

      At this request, with noble disposition 
      Each present lord began to promise aid, 
      As bound in knighthood to her imposition, 
      Longing to hear the hateful foe bewrayed. 
      But she, that yet her sad task hath not said, 
        The protestation stops. 'O, speak,' quoth she, 
        'How may this forced stain be wiped from me?

      'What is the quality of my offence, 
      Being constrained with dreadful circumstance? 
      May my pure mind with the foul act dispense, 
      My low-declined honour to advance? 
      May any terms acquit me from this chance? 
        The poisoned fountain clears itself again; 
        And why not I from this compelled stain?'

      With this, they all at once began to say, 
      Her body's stain her mind untainted clears; 
      While with a joyless smile she turns. away 
      The face, that map which deep impression bears 
      Of hard misfortune, carved in it with tears. 
        'No, no,' quoth she, 'no dame hereafter living 
        By my excuse shall claim excuse's giving.'

      Here with a sigh, as if her heart would break, 
      She throws forth Tarquin's name: 'He, he,' she says, 
      But more than 'he' her poor tongue could not speak; 
      Till after many accents and delays, 
      Untimely breathings, sick and short assays, 
        She utters this: 'He, he, fair lords, 'tis he, 
        That guides this hand to give this wound to me.'

      Even here, she sheathed in her harmless breast 
      A harmful knife, that thence her soul unsheathed: 
      That blow did bail it from the deep unrest 
      Of that polluted prison where it breathed. 
      Her contrite sighs unto the clouds bequeathed 
        Her winged sprite and through her wounds doth fly 
        Life's lasting date from cancelled destiny.

      Stone-still, astonished with this deadly deed, 
      Stood Collatine and all his lordly crew; 
      Till Lucrece' father, that beholds her bleed, 
      Himself on her self-slaught'red body threw; 
      And from the purple fountain Brutus drew 
        The murd'rous knife, and, as it left the place, 
        Her blood, in poor revenge, held it in chase;

      And bubbling from her breast, it doth divide 
      In two slow rivers, that the crimson blood 
      Circles her body in on every side, 
      Who like a late-sacked island vastly stood 
      Bare and unpeopled in this fearful flood. 
        Some of her blood still pure and red remained, 
        And some looked black, and that false Tarquin stained.

      About the mourning and congealed face 
      Of that black blood a wat'ry rigol goes, 
      Which seems to weep upon the tainted place; 
      And ever since, as pitying Lucrece' woes, 
      Corrupted blood some watery token shows; 
        And blood untainted still doth red abide, 
        Blushing at that which is so putrified.

      'Daughter, dear daughter,' old Lucretius cries, 
      'That life was mine which thou hast here deprived. 
      If in the child the father's image lies, 
      Where shall I live now Lucrece is unlived? 
      Thou wast not to this end from me derived. 
        If children predecease progenitors, 
        We are their offspring, and they none of ours.

      'Poor broken glass, I often did behold 
      In thy sweet semblance my old age new born; 
      But now that fair fresh mirror, dim and old, 
      Shows me a bare-boned death by time outworn; 
      O, from thy cheeks my image thou hast torn, 
        And shivered all the beauty of my glass, 
        That I no more can see what once I was.

      'O time, cease thou thy course and last no longer, 
      If they surcease to be that should survive. 
      Shall rotten death make conquest of the stronger, 
      And leave the falt'ring feeble souls alive? 
      The old bees die, the young possess their hive. 
        Then live, sweet Lucrece, live again, and see 
        Thy father die, and not thy father thee.'

      By this, starts Collatine as from a dream, 
      And bids Lucretius give his sorrow place; 
      And then in key-cold Lucrece' bleeding stream 
      He falls, and bathes the pale fear in his face, 
      And counterfeits to die with her a space; 
        Till manly shame bids him possess his breath, 
        And live to be revenged on her death.

      The deep vexation of his inward soul 
      Hath served a dumb arrest upon his tongue; 
      Who, mad that sorrow should his use control 
      Or keep him from heart-easing words so long, 
      Begins to talk; but through his lips do throng 
        Weak words, so thick come in his poor heart's aid 
        That no man could distinguish what he said.

      Yet sometime 'Tarquin' was pronounced plain, 
      But through his teeth, as if the name he tore. 
      This windy tempest, till it blow up rain, 
      Held back his sorrow's tide, to make it more; 
      At last it rains, and busy winds give o'er; 
        Then son and father weep with equal strife 
        Who should weep most, for daughter or for wife.

      The one doth call her his, the other his, 
      Yet neither may possess the claim they lay. 
      The father says 'She's mine'. 'O, mine she is,' 
      Replies her husband: 'do not take away 
      My sorrow's interest; let no mourner say 
        He weeps for her, for she was only mine, 
        And only must be wailed by Collatine.'

      'O,' quoth Lucretius, 'I did give that life 
      Which she too early and too late hath spilled.' 
      'Woe, woe,' quoth Collatine, 'she was my wife; 
      I owed her, and 'tis mine that she hath killed.' 
      'My daughter' and 'my wife' with clamours filled 
        The dispersed air, who, holding Lucrece' life, 
        Answered their cries, 'my daughter' and 'my wife'.

      Brutus, who plucked the knife from Lucrece' side, 
      Seeing such emulation in their woe, 
      Began to clothe his wit in state and pride, 
      Burying in Lucrece' wound his folly's show. 
      He with the Romans was esteemed so 
        As silly jeering idiots are with kings, 
        For sportive words and utt'ring foolish things.

      But now he throws that shallow habit by 
      Wherein deep policy did him disguise, 
      And armed his long-hid wits advisedly 
      To check the tears in Collatinus' eyes. 
      'Thou wronged lord of Rome,' quoth he, 'arise; 
        Let my unsounded self, supposed a fool, 
        Now set thy long-experienced wit to school.

      'Why, Collatine, is woe the cure for woe? 
      Do wounds help wounds, or grief help grievous deeds? 
      Is it revenge to give thyself a blow 
      For his foul act by whom thy fair wife bleeds? 
      Such childish humour from weak minds proceeds. 
        Thy wretched wife mistook the matter so 
        To slay herself, that should have slain her foe.

      'Courageous Roman, do not steep thy heart 
      In such relenting dew of lamentations, 
      But kneel with me and help to bear thy part 
      To rouse our Roman gods with invocations 
      That they will suffer these abominations, 
        Since Rome herself in them doth stand disgraced, 
        By our strong arms from forth her fair streets chased.

      'Now by the Capitol that we adore, 
      And by this chaste blood so unjustly stained, 
      By heaven's fair sun that breeds the fat earth's store, 
      By all our country rights in Rome maintained, 
      And by chaste Lucrece' soul that late complained 
        Her wrongs to us, and by this bloody knife, 
        We will revenge the death of this true wife.'

      This said, he struck his hand upon his breast, 
      And kissed the fatal knife to end his vow, 
      And to his protestation urged the rest, 
      Who, wond'ring at him, did his words allow; 
      Then jointly to the ground their knees they bow, 
        And that deep vow which Brutus made before 
        He doth again repeat, and that they swore.

      When they had sworn to this advised doom, 
      They did conclude to bear dead Lucrece thence, 
      To show her bleeding body thorough Rome, 
      And so to publish Tarquin's foul offence; 
      Which being done with speedy diligence, 
        The Romans plausible did give consent 
        To Tarquin's everlasting banishment. 
 

                    -THE END-
 

1594
THE TAMING OF THE SHREW
                                      
                  Dramatis Personae

    Persons in the Induction
  A LORD
  CHRISTOPHER SLY, a tinker
  HOSTESS
  PAGE
  PLAYERS
  HUNTSMEN
  SERVANTS

  BAPTISTA MINOLA, a gentleman of Padua
  VINCENTIO, a Merchant of Pisa
  LUCENTIO, son to Vincentio, in love with Bianca
  PETRUCHIO, a gentleman of Verona, a suitor to Katherina

    Suitors to Bianca
  GREMIO
  HORTENSIO

    Servants to Lucentio
  TRANIO
  BIONDELLO

    Servants to Petruchio
  GRUMIO
  CURTIS

  A PEDANT

    Daughters to Baptista
  KATHERINA, the shrew
  BIANCA

  A WIDOW

  Tailor, Haberdasher, and Servants attending on Baptista and
    Petruchio

                             SCENE:
            Padua, and PETRUCHIO'S house in the country
                      INDUCTION. SCENE I.
                  Before an alehouse on a heath

                      Enter HOSTESS and SLY

  SLY. I'll pheeze you, in faith.
  HOSTESS. A pair of stocks, you rogue!
  SLY. Y'are a baggage; the Slys are no rogues. Look in the
    chronicles: we came in with Richard Conqueror. Therefore, paucas
    pallabris; let the world slide. Sessa!
  HOSTESS. You will not pay for the glasses you have burst?
  SLY. No, not a denier. Go by, Saint Jeronimy, go to thy cold bed
    and warm thee.
  HOSTESS. I know my remedy; I must go fetch the third-borough.
                                                            Exit
  SLY. Third, or fourth, or fifth borough, I'll answer him by law.
    I'll not budge an inch, boy; let him come, and kindly.
                                                  [Falls asleep]

       Wind horns. Enter a LORD from bunting, with his train

  LORD. Huntsman, I charge thee, tender well my hounds;
    Brach Merriman, the poor cur, is emboss'd;
    And couple Clowder with the deep-mouth'd brach.
    Saw'st thou not, boy, how Silver made it good
    At the hedge corner, in the coldest fault?
    I would not lose the dog for twenty pound.
  FIRST HUNTSMAN. Why, Belman is as good as he, my lord;
    He cried upon it at the merest loss,
    And twice to-day pick'd out the dullest scent;
    Trust me, I take him for the better dog.
  LORD. Thou art a fool; if Echo were as fleet,
    I would esteem him worth a dozen such.
    But sup them well, and look unto them all;
    To-morrow I intend to hunt again.
  FIRST HUNTSMAN. I will, my lord.
  LORD. What's here? One dead, or drunk?
    See, doth he breathe?
  SECOND HUNTSMAN. He breathes, my lord. Were he not warm'd with ale,
    This were a bed but cold to sleep so soundly.
  LORD. O monstrous beast, how like a swine he lies!
    Grim death, how foul and loathsome is thine image!
    Sirs, I will practise on this drunken man.
    What think you, if he were convey'd to bed,
    Wrapp'd in sweet clothes, rings put upon his fingers,
    A most delicious banquet by his bed,
    And brave attendants near him when he wakes,
    Would not the beggar then forget himself?
  FIRST HUNTSMAN. Believe me, lord, I think he cannot choose.
  SECOND HUNTSMAN. It would seem strange unto him when he wak'd.
  LORD. Even as a flatt'ring dream or worthless fancy.
    Then take him up, and manage well the jest:
    Carry him gently to my fairest chamber,
    And hang it round with all my wanton pictures;
    Balm his foul head in warm distilled waters,
    And burn sweet wood to make the lodging sweet;
    Procure me music ready when he wakes,
    To make a dulcet and a heavenly sound;
    And if he chance to speak, be ready straight,
    And with a low submissive reverence
    Say 'What is it your honour will command?'
    Let one attend him with a silver basin
    Full of rose-water and bestrew'd with flowers;
    Another bear the ewer, the third a diaper,
    And say 'Will't please your lordship cool your hands?'
    Some one be ready with a costly suit,
    And ask him what apparel he will wear;
    Another tell him of his hounds and horse,
    And that his lady mourns at his disease;
    Persuade him that he hath been lunatic,
    And, when he says he is, say that he dreams,
    For he is nothing but a mighty lord.
    This do, and do it kindly, gentle sirs;
    It will be pastime passing excellent,
    If it be husbanded with modesty.
  FIRST HUNTSMAN. My lord, I warrant you we will play our part
    As he shall think by our true diligence
    He is no less than what we say he is.
  LORD. Take him up gently, and to bed with him;
    And each one to his office when he wakes.
                          [SLY is carried out. A trumpet sounds]
    Sirrah, go see what trumpet 'tis that sounds-
                                                    Exit SERVANT
    Belike some noble gentleman that means,
    Travelling some journey, to repose him here.

                         Re-enter a SERVINGMAN

    How now! who is it?
  SERVANT. An't please your honour, players
    That offer service to your lordship.
  LORD. Bid them come near.

                             Enter PLAYERS

    Now, fellows, you are welcome.
  PLAYERS. We thank your honour.
  LORD. Do you intend to stay with me to-night?
  PLAYER. So please your lordship to accept our duty.
  LORD. With all my heart. This fellow I remember
    Since once he play'd a farmer's eldest son;
    'Twas where you woo'd the gentlewoman so well.
    I have forgot your name; but, sure, that part
    Was aptly fitted and naturally perform'd.
  PLAYER. I think 'twas Soto that your honour means.
  LORD. 'Tis very true; thou didst it excellent.
    Well, you are come to me in happy time,
    The rather for I have some sport in hand
    Wherein your cunning can assist me much.
    There is a lord will hear you play to-night;
    But I am doubtful of your modesties,
    Lest, over-eying of his odd behaviour,
    For yet his honour never heard a play,
    You break into some merry passion
    And so offend him; for I tell you, sirs,
    If you should smile, he grows impatient.
  PLAYER. Fear not, my lord; we can contain ourselves,
    Were he the veriest antic in the world.
  LORD. Go, sirrah, take them to the buttery,
    And give them friendly welcome every one;
    Let them want nothing that my house affords.
                                       Exit one with the PLAYERS
    Sirrah, go you to Bartholomew my page,
    And see him dress'd in all suits like a lady;
    That done, conduct him to the drunkard's chamber,
    And call him 'madam,' do him obeisance.
    Tell him from me- as he will win my love-
    He bear himself with honourable action,
    Such as he hath observ'd in noble ladies
    Unto their lords, by them accomplished;
    Such duty to the drunkard let him do,
    With soft low tongue and lowly courtesy,
    And say 'What is't your honour will command,
    Wherein your lady and your humble wife
    May show her duty and make known her love?'
    And then with kind embracements, tempting kisses,
    And with declining head into his bosom,
    Bid him shed tears, as being overjoyed
    To see her noble lord restor'd to health,
    Who for this seven years hath esteemed him
    No better than a poor and loathsome beggar.
    And if the boy have not a woman's gift
    To rain a shower of commanded tears,
    An onion will do well for such a shift,
    Which, in a napkin being close convey'd,
    Shall in despite enforce a watery eye.
    See this dispatch'd with all the haste thou canst;
    Anon I'll give thee more instructions.     Exit a SERVINGMAN
    I know the boy will well usurp the grace,
    Voice, gait, and action, of a gentlewoman;
    I long to hear him call the drunkard 'husband';
    And how my men will stay themselves from laughter
    When they do homage to this simple peasant.
    I'll in to counsel them; haply my presence
    May well abate the over-merry spleen,
    Which otherwise would grow into extremes.             Exeunt
                            SCENE II.
               A bedchamber in the LORD'S house

    Enter aloft SLY, with ATTENDANTS; some with apparel, basin
             and ewer, and other appurtenances; and LORD

  SLY. For God's sake, a pot of small ale.
  FIRST SERVANT. Will't please your lordship drink a cup of sack?
  SECOND SERVANT. Will't please your honour taste of these conserves?
  THIRD SERVANT. What raiment will your honour wear to-day?
  SLY. I am Christophero Sly; call not me 'honour' nor 'lordship.' I
    ne'er drank sack in my life; and if you give me any conserves,
    give me conserves of beef. Ne'er ask me what raiment I'll wear,
    for I have no more doublets than backs, no more stockings than
    legs, nor no more shoes than feet- nay, sometime more feet than
    shoes, or such shoes as my toes look through the overleather.
  LORD. Heaven cease this idle humour in your honour!
    O, that a mighty man of such descent,
    Of such possessions, and so high esteem,
    Should be infused with so foul a spirit!
  SLY. What, would you make me mad? Am not I Christopher Sly, old
    Sly's son of Burton Heath; by birth a pedlar, by education a
    cardmaker, by transmutation a bear-herd, and now by present
    profession a tinker? Ask Marian Hacket, the fat ale-wife of
    Wincot, if she know me not; if she say I am not fourteen pence on
    the score for sheer ale, score me up for the lying'st knave in
    Christendom. What! I am not bestraught.  [Taking a pot of ale]
    Here's-
  THIRD SERVANT. O, this it is that makes your lady mourn!
  SECOND SERVANT. O, this is it that makes your servants droop!
  LORD. Hence comes it that your kindred shuns your house,
    As beaten hence by your strange lunacy.
    O noble lord, bethink thee of thy birth!
    Call home thy ancient thoughts from banishment,
    And banish hence these abject lowly dreams.
    Look how thy servants do attend on thee,
    Each in his office ready at thy beck.
    Wilt thou have music? Hark! Apollo plays,            [Music]
    And twenty caged nightingales do sing.
    Or wilt thou sleep? We'll have thee to a couch
    Softer and sweeter than the lustful bed
    On purpose trimm'd up for Semiramis.
    Say thou wilt walk: we will bestrew the ground.
    Or wilt thou ride? Thy horses shall be trapp'd,
    Their harness studded all with gold and pearl.
    Dost thou love hawking? Thou hast hawks will soar
    Above the morning lark. Or wilt thou hunt?
    Thy hounds shall make the welkin answer them
    And fetch shall echoes from the hollow earth.
  FIRST SERVANT. Say thou wilt course; thy greyhounds are as swift
    As breathed stags; ay, fleeter than the roe.
  SECOND SERVANT. Dost thou love pictures? We will fetch thee
      straight
    Adonis painted by a running brook,
    And Cytherea all in sedges hid,
    Which seem to move and wanton with her breath
    Even as the waving sedges play wi' th' wind.
  LORD. We'll show thee lo as she was a maid
    And how she was beguiled and surpris'd,
    As lively painted as the deed was done.
  THIRD SERVANT. Or Daphne roaming through a thorny wood,
    Scratching her legs, that one shall swear she bleeds
    And at that sight shall sad Apollo weep,
    So workmanly the blood and tears are drawn.
  LORD. Thou art a lord, and nothing but a lord.
    Thou hast a lady far more beautiful
    Than any woman in this waning age.
  FIRST SERVANT. And, till the tears that she hath shed for thee
    Like envious floods o'er-run her lovely face,
    She was the fairest creature in the world;
    And yet she is inferior to none.
  SLY. Am I a lord and have I such a lady?
    Or do I dream? Or have I dream'd till now?
    I do not sleep: I see, I hear, I speak;
    I smell sweet savours, and I feel soft things.
    Upon my life, I am a lord indeed,
    And not a tinker, nor Christopher Sly.
    Well, bring our lady hither to our sight;
    And once again, a pot o' th' smallest ale.
  SECOND SERVANT. Will't please your Mightiness to wash your hands?
    O, how we joy to see your wit restor'd!
    O, that once more you knew but what you are!
    These fifteen years you have been in a dream;
    Or, when you wak'd, so wak'd as if you slept.
  SLY. These fifteen years! by my fay, a goodly nap.
    But did I never speak of all that time?
  FIRST SERVANT. O, yes, my lord, but very idle words;
    For though you lay here in this goodly chamber,
    Yet would you say ye were beaten out of door;
    And rail upon the hostess of the house,
    And say you would present her at the leet,
    Because she brought stone jugs and no seal'd quarts.
    Sometimes you would call out for Cicely Hacket.
  SLY. Ay, the woman's maid of the house.
  THIRD SERVANT. Why, sir, you know no house nor no such maid,
    Nor no such men as you have reckon'd up,
    As Stephen Sly, and old John Naps of Greece,
    And Peter Turph, and Henry Pimpernell;
    And twenty more such names and men as these,
    Which never were, nor no man ever saw.
  SLY. Now, Lord be thanked for my good amends!
  ALL. Amen.

           Enter the PAGE as a lady, with ATTENDANTS

  SLY. I thank thee; thou shalt not lose by it.
  PAGE. How fares my noble lord?
  SLY. Marry, I fare well; for here is cheer enough.
    Where is my wife?
  PAGE. Here, noble lord; what is thy will with her?
  SLY. Are you my wife, and will not call me husband?
    My men should call me 'lord'; I am your goodman.
  PAGE. My husband and my lord, my lord and husband;
    I am your wife in all obedience.
  SLY. I know it well. What must I call her?
  LORD. Madam.
  SLY. Al'ce madam, or Joan madam?
  LORD. Madam, and nothing else; so lords call ladies.
  SLY. Madam wife, they say that I have dream'd
    And slept above some fifteen year or more.
  PAGE. Ay, and the time seems thirty unto me,
    Being all this time abandon'd from your bed.
  SLY. 'Tis much. Servants, leave me and her alone.
                                                 Exeunt SERVANTS
    Madam, undress you, and come now to bed.
  PAGE. Thrice noble lord, let me entreat of you
    To pardon me yet for a night or two;
    Or, if not so, until the sun be set.
    For your physicians have expressly charg'd,
    In peril to incur your former malady,
    That I should yet absent me from your bed.
    I hope this reason stands for my excuse.
  SLY. Ay, it stands so that I may hardly tarry so long. But I would
    be loath to fall into my dreams again. I will therefore tarry in
    despite of the flesh and the blood.

                       Enter a MESSENGER

  MESSENGER. Your honour's players, hearing your amendment,
    Are come to play a pleasant comedy;
    For so your doctors hold it very meet,
    Seeing too much sadness hath congeal'd your blood,
    And melancholy is the nurse of frenzy.
    Therefore they thought it good you hear a play
    And frame your mind to mirth and merriment,
    Which bars a thousand harms and lengthens life.
  SLY. Marry, I will; let them play it. Is not a comonty a
    Christmas gambold or a tumbling-trick?
  PAGE. No, my good lord, it is more pleasing stuff.
  SLY. What, household stuff?
  PAGE. It is a kind of history.
  SLY. Well, we'll see't. Come, madam wife, sit by my side and let
    the world slip;-we shall ne'er be younger.
                                                 [They sit down]

          A flourish of trumpets announces the play
                       ACT I. SCENE I.
                    Padua. A public place

                Enter LUCENTIO and his man TRANIO

  LUCENTIO. Tranio, since for the great desire I had
    To see fair Padua, nursery of arts,
    I am arriv'd for fruitful Lombardy,
    The pleasant garden of great Italy,
    And by my father's love and leave am arm'd
    With his good will and thy good company,
    My trusty servant well approv'd in all,
    Here let us breathe, and haply institute
    A course of learning and ingenious studies.
    Pisa, renowned for grave citizens,
    Gave me my being and my father first,
    A merchant of great traffic through the world,
    Vincentio, come of the Bentivolii;
    Vincentio's son, brought up in Florence,
    It shall become to serve all hopes conceiv'd,
    To deck his fortune with his virtuous deeds.
    And therefore, Tranio, for the time I study,
    Virtue and that part of philosophy
    Will I apply that treats of happiness
    By virtue specially to be achiev'd.
    Tell me thy mind; for I have Pisa left
    And am to Padua come as he that leaves
    A shallow plash to plunge him in the deep,
    And with satiety seeks to quench his thirst.
  TRANIO. Mi perdonato, gentle master mine;
    I am in all affected as yourself;
    Glad that you thus continue your resolve
    To suck the sweets of sweet philosophy.
    Only, good master, while we do admire
    This virtue and this moral discipline,
    Let's be no Stoics nor no stocks, I pray,
    Or so devote to Aristotle's checks
    As Ovid be an outcast quite abjur'd.
    Balk logic with acquaintance that you have,
    And practise rhetoric in your common talk;
    Music and poesy use to quicken you;
    The mathematics and the metaphysics,
    Fall to them as you find your stomach serves you.
    No profit grows where is no pleasure ta'en;
    In brief, sir, study what you most affect.
  LUCENTIO. Gramercies, Tranio, well dost thou advise.
    If, Biondello, thou wert come ashore,
    We could at once put us in readiness,
    And take a lodging fit to entertain
    Such friends as time in Padua shall beget.

      Enter BAPTISTA with his two daughters, KATHERINA
        and BIANCA; GREMIO, a pantaloon; HORTENSIO,
        suitor to BIANCA. LUCENTIO and TRANIO stand by

    But stay awhile; what company is this?
  TRANIO. Master, some show to welcome us to town.
  BAPTISTA. Gentlemen, importune me no farther,
    For how I firmly am resolv'd you know;
    That is, not to bestow my youngest daughter
    Before I have a husband for the elder.
    If either of you both love Katherina,
    Because I know you well and love you well,
    Leave shall you have to court her at your pleasure.
  GREMIO. To cart her rather. She's too rough for me.
    There, there, Hortensio, will you any wife?
  KATHERINA.  [To BAPTISTA]  I pray you, sir, is it your will
    To make a stale of me amongst these mates?
  HORTENSIO. Mates, maid! How mean you that? No mates for you,
    Unless you were of gentler, milder mould.
  KATHERINA. I' faith, sir, you shall never need to fear;
    Iwis it is not halfway to her heart;
    But if it were, doubt not her care should be
    To comb your noddle with a three-legg'd stool,
    And paint your face, and use you like a fool.
  HORTENSIO. From all such devils, good Lord deliver us!
  GREMIO. And me, too, good Lord!
  TRANIO. Husht, master! Here's some good pastime toward;
    That wench is stark mad or wonderful froward.
  LUCENTIO. But in the other's silence do I see
    Maid's mild behaviour and sobriety.
    Peace, Tranio!
  TRANIO. Well said, master; mum! and gaze your fill.
  BAPTISTA. Gentlemen, that I may soon make good
    What I have said- Bianca, get you in;
    And let it not displease thee, good Bianca,
    For I will love thee ne'er the less, my girl.
  KATHERINA. A pretty peat! it is best
    Put finger in the eye, an she knew why.
  BIANCA. Sister, content you in my discontent.
    Sir, to your pleasure humbly I subscribe;
    My books and instruments shall be my company,
    On them to look, and practise by myself.
  LUCENTIO. Hark, Tranio, thou mayst hear Minerva speak!
  HORTENSIO. Signior Baptista, will you be so strange?
    Sorry am I that our good will effects
    Bianca's grief.
  GREMIO. Why will you mew her up,
    Signior Baptista, for this fiend of hell,
    And make her bear the penance of her tongue?
  BAPTISTA. Gentlemen, content ye; I am resolv'd.
    Go in, Bianca.                                   Exit BIANCA
    And for I know she taketh most delight
    In music, instruments, and poetry,
    Schoolmasters will I keep within my house
    Fit to instruct her youth. If you, Hortensio,
    Or, Signior Gremio, you, know any such,
    Prefer them hither; for to cunning men
    I will be very kind, and liberal
    To mine own children in good bringing-up;
    And so, farewell. Katherina, you may stay;
    For I have more to commune with Bianca.                 Exit
  KATHERINA. Why, and I trust I may go too, may I not?
    What! shall I be appointed hours, as though, belike,
    I knew not what to take and what to leave? Ha!          Exit
  GREMIO. You may go to the devil's dam; your gifts are so good
    here's none will hold you. There! Love is not so great,
    Hortensio, but we may blow our nails together, and fast it fairly
    out; our cake's dough on both sides. Farewell; yet, for the love
    I bear my sweet Bianca, if I can by any means light on a fit man
    to teach her that wherein she delights, I will wish him to her
    father.
  HORTENSIO. SO Will I, Signior Gremio; but a word, I pray. Though
    the nature of our quarrel yet never brook'd parle, know now, upon
    advice, it toucheth us both- that we may yet again have access to
    our fair mistress, and be happy rivals in Bianca's love- to
    labour and effect one thing specially.
  GREMIO. What's that, I pray?
  HORTENSIO. Marry, sir, to get a husband for her sister.
  GREMIO. A husband? a devil.
  HORTENSIO. I say a husband.
  GREMIO. I say a devil. Think'st thou, Hortensio, though her father
    be very rich, any man is so very a fool to be married to hell?
  HORTENSIO. Tush, Gremio! Though it pass your patience and mine to
    endure her loud alarums, why, man, there be good fellows in the
    world, an a man could light on them, would take her with all
    faults, and money enough.
  GREMIO. I cannot tell; but I had as lief take her dowry with this
    condition: to be whipp'd at the high cross every morning.
  HORTENSIO. Faith, as you say, there's small choice in rotten
    apples. But, come; since this bar in law makes us friends, it
    shall be so far forth friendly maintain'd till by helping
    Baptista's eldest daughter to a husband we set his youngest free
    for a husband, and then have to't afresh. Sweet Bianca! Happy man
    be his dole! He that runs fastest gets the ring. How say you,
    Signior Gremio?
  GREMIO. I am agreed; and would I had given him the best horse in
    Padua to begin his wooing that would thoroughly woo her, wed her,
    and bed her, and rid the house of her! Come on.
                                     Exeunt GREMIO and HORTENSIO
  TRANIO. I pray, sir, tell me, is it possible
    That love should of a sudden take such hold?
  LUCENTIO. O Tranio, till I found it to be true,
    I never thought it possible or likely.
    But see! while idly I stood looking on,
    I found the effect of love in idleness;
    And now in plainness do confess to thee,
    That art to me as secret and as dear
    As Anna to the Queen of Carthage was-
    Tranio, I burn, I pine, I perish, Tranio,
    If I achieve not this young modest girl.
    Counsel me, Tranio, for I know thou canst;
    Assist me, Tranio, for I know thou wilt.
  TRANIO. Master, it is no time to chide you now;
    Affection is not rated from the heart;
    If love have touch'd you, nought remains but so:
    'Redime te captum quam queas minimo.'
  LUCENTIO. Gramercies, lad. Go forward; this contents;
    The rest will comfort, for thy counsel's sound.
  TRANIO. Master, you look'd so longly on the maid.
    Perhaps you mark'd not what's the pith of all.
  LUCENTIO. O, yes, I saw sweet beauty in her face,
    Such as the daughter of Agenor had,
    That made great Jove to humble him to her hand,
    When with his knees he kiss'd the Cretan strand.
  TRANIO. Saw you no more? Mark'd you not how her sister
    Began to scold and raise up such a storm
    That mortal ears might hardly endure the din?
  LUCENTIO. Tranio, I saw her coral lips to move,
    And with her breath she did perfume the air;
    Sacred and sweet was all I saw in her.
  TRANIO. Nay, then 'tis time to stir him from his trance.
    I pray, awake, sir. If you love the maid,
    Bend thoughts and wits to achieve her. Thus it stands:
    Her elder sister is so curst and shrewd
    That, till the father rid his hands of her,
    Master, your love must live a maid at home;
    And therefore has he closely mew'd her up,
    Because she will not be annoy'd with suitors.
  LUCENTIO. Ah, Tranio, what a cruel father's he!
    But art thou not advis'd he took some care
    To get her cunning schoolmasters to instruct her?
  TRANIO. Ay, marry, am I, sir, and now 'tis plotted.
  LUCENTIO. I have it, Tranio.
  TRANIO. Master, for my hand,
    Both our inventions meet and jump in one.
  LUCENTIO. Tell me thine first.
  TRANIO. You will be schoolmaster,
    And undertake the teaching of the maid-
    That's your device.
  LUCENTIO. It is. May it be done?
  TRANIO. Not possible; for who shall bear your part
    And be in Padua here Vincentio's son;
    Keep house and ply his book, welcome his friends,
    Visit his countrymen, and banquet them?
  LUCENTIO. Basta, content thee, for I have it full.
    We have not yet been seen in any house,
    Nor can we be distinguish'd by our faces
    For man or master. Then it follows thus:
    Thou shalt be master, Tranio, in my stead,
    Keep house and port and servants, as I should;
    I will some other be- some Florentine,
    Some Neapolitan, or meaner man of Pisa.
    'Tis hatch'd, and shall be so. Tranio, at once
    Uncase thee; take my colour'd hat and cloak.
    When Biondello comes, he waits on thee;
    But I will charm him first to keep his tongue.
  TRANIO. So had you need.                [They exchange habits]
    In brief, sir, sith it your pleasure is,
    And I am tied to be obedient-
    For so your father charg'd me at our parting:
    'Be serviceable to my son' quoth he,
    Although I think 'twas in another sense-
    I am content to be Lucentio,
    Because so well I love Lucentio.
  LUCENTIO. Tranio, be so because Lucentio loves;
    And let me be a slave t' achieve that maid
    Whose sudden sight hath thrall'd my wounded eye.

                       Enter BIONDELLO.

    Here comes the rogue. Sirrah, where have you been?
  BIONDELLO. Where have I been! Nay, how now! where are you?
    Master, has my fellow Tranio stol'n your clothes?
    Or you stol'n his? or both? Pray, what's the news?
  LUCENTIO. Sirrah, come hither; 'tis no time to jest,
    And therefore frame your manners to the time.
    Your fellow Tranio here, to save my life,
    Puts my apparel and my count'nance on,
    And I for my escape have put on his;
    For in a quarrel since I came ashore
    I kill'd a man, and fear I was descried.
    Wait you on him, I charge you, as becomes,
    While I make way from hence to save my life.
    You understand me?
  BIONDELLO. I, sir? Ne'er a whit.
  LUCENTIO. And not a jot of Tranio in your mouth:
    Tranio is chang'd into Lucentio.
  BIONDELLO. The better for him; would I were so too!
  TRANIO. So could I, faith, boy, to have the next wish after,
    That Lucentio indeed had Baptista's youngest daughter.
    But, sirrah, not for my sake but your master's, I advise
    You use your manners discreetly in all kind of companies.
    When I am alone, why, then I am Tranio;
    But in all places else your master Lucentio.
  LUCENTIO. Tranio, let's go.
    One thing more rests, that thyself execute-
    To make one among these wooers. If thou ask me why-
    Sufficeth, my reasons are both good and weighty.      Exeunt

                 The Presenters above speak

  FIRST SERVANT. My lord, you nod; you do not mind the play.
  SLY. Yes, by Saint Anne do I. A good matter, surely; comes there
    any more of it?
  PAGE. My lord, 'tis but begun.
  SLY. 'Tis a very excellent piece of work, madam lady
    Would 'twere done!                        [They sit and mark]
                            SCENE II.
                Padua. Before HORTENSIO'S house

              Enter PETRUCHIO and his man GRUMIO

  PETRUCHIO. Verona, for a while I take my leave,
    To see my friends in Padua; but of all
    My best beloved and approved friend,
    Hortensio; and I trow this is his house.
    Here, sirrah Grumio, knock, I say.
 GRUMIO. Knock, sir! Whom should I knock?
    Is there any man has rebus'd your worship?
  PETRUCHIO. Villain, I say, knock me here soundly.
  GRUMIO. Knock you here, sir? Why, sir, what am I, sir, that I
    should knock you here, sir?
  PETRUCHIO. Villain, I say, knock me at this gate,
    And rap me well, or I'll knock your knave's pate.
  GRUMIO. My master is grown quarrelsome. I should knock you first,
    And then I know after who comes by the worst.
  PETRUCHIO. Will it not be?
    Faith, sirrah, an you'll not knock I'll ring it;
    I'll try how you can sol-fa, and sing it.
                                     [He wrings him by the ears]
  GRUMIO. Help, masters, help! My master is mad.
  PETRUCHIO. Now knock when I bid you, sirrah villain!

                        Enter HORTENSIO

  HORTENSIO. How now! what's the matter? My old friend Grumio and my
    good friend Petruchio! How do you all at Verona?
  PETRUCHIO. Signior Hortensio, come you to part the fray?
    'Con tutto il cuore ben trovato' may I say.
  HORTENSIO. Alla nostra casa ben venuto,
    Molto honorato signor mio Petruchio.
    Rise, Grumio, rise; we will compound this quarrel.
  GRUMIO. Nay, 'tis no matter, sir, what he 'leges in Latin. If this
    be not a lawful cause for me to leave his service- look you, sir:
    he bid me knock him and rap him soundly, sir. Well, was it fit
    for a servant to use his master so; being, perhaps, for aught I
    see, two and thirty, a pip out?
    Whom would to God I had well knock'd at first,
    Then had not Grumio come by the worst.
  PETRUCHIO. A senseless villain! Good Hortensio,
    I bade the rascal knock upon your gate,
    And could not get him for my heart to do it.
  GRUMIO. Knock at the gate? O heavens! Spake you not these words
    plain: 'Sirrah knock me here, rap me here, knock me well, and
    knock me soundly'? And come you now with 'knocking at the gate'?
  PETRUCHIO. Sirrah, be gone, or talk not, I advise you.
  HORTENSIO. Petruchio, patience; I am Grumio's pledge;
    Why, this's a heavy chance 'twixt him and you,
    Your ancient, trusty, pleasant servant Grumio.
    And tell me now, sweet friend, what happy gale
    Blows you to Padua here from old Verona?
  PETRUCHIO. Such wind as scatters young men through the world
    To seek their fortunes farther than at home,
    Where small experience grows. But in a few,
    Signior Hortensio, thus it stands with me:
    Antonio, my father, is deceas'd,
    And I have thrust myself into this maze,
    Haply to wive and thrive as best I may;
    Crowns in my purse I have, and goods at home,
    And so am come abroad to see the world.
  HORTENSIO. Petruchio, shall I then come roundly to thee
    And wish thee to a shrewd ill-favour'd wife?
    Thou'dst thank me but a little for my counsel,
    And yet I'll promise thee she shall be rich,
    And very rich; but th'art too much my friend,
    And I'll not wish thee to her.
  PETRUCHIO. Signior Hortensio, 'twixt such friends as we
    Few words suffice; and therefore, if thou know
    One rich enough to be Petruchio's wife,
    As wealth is burden of my wooing dance,
    Be she as foul as was Florentius' love,
    As old as Sibyl, and as curst and shrewd
    As Socrates' Xanthippe or a worse-
    She moves me not, or not removes, at least,
    Affection's edge in me, were she as rough
    As are the swelling Adriatic seas.
    I come to wive it wealthily in Padua;
    If wealthily, then happily in Padua.
  GRUMIO. Nay, look you, sir, he tells you flatly what his mind is.
    Why, give him gold enough and marry him to a puppet or an
    aglet-baby, or an old trot with ne'er a tooth in her head, though
    she has as many diseases as two and fifty horses. Why, nothing
    comes amiss, so money comes withal.
  HORTENSIO. Petruchio, since we are stepp'd thus far in,
    I will continue that I broach'd in jest.
    I can, Petruchio, help thee to a wife
    With wealth enough, and young and beauteous;
    Brought up as best becomes a gentlewoman;
    Her only fault, and that is faults enough,
    Is- that she is intolerable curst,
    And shrewd and froward so beyond all measure
    That, were my state far worser than it is,
    I would not wed her for a mine of gold.
  PETRUCHIO. Hortensio, peace! thou know'st not gold's effect.
    Tell me her father's name, and 'tis enough;
    For I will board her though she chide as loud
    As thunder when the clouds in autumn crack.
  HORTENSIO. Her father is Baptista Minola,
    An affable and courteous gentleman;
    Her name is Katherina Minola,
    Renown'd in Padua for her scolding tongue.
  PETRUCHIO. I know her father, though I know not her;
    And he knew my deceased father well.
    I will not sleep, Hortensio, till I see her;
    And therefore let me be thus bold with you
    To give you over at this first encounter,
    Unless you will accompany me thither.
  GRUMIO. I pray you, sir, let him go while the humour lasts. O' my
    word, and she knew him as well as I do, she would think scolding
    would do little good upon him. She may perhaps call him half a
    score knaves or so. Why, that's nothing; and he begin once, he'll
    rail in his rope-tricks. I'll tell you what, sir: an she stand
    him but a little, he will throw a figure in her face, and so
    disfigure her with it that she shall have no more eyes to see
    withal than a cat. You know him not, sir.
  HORTENSIO. Tarry, Petruchio, I must go with thee,
    For in Baptista's keep my treasure is.
    He hath the jewel of my life in hold,
    His youngest daughter, beautiful Bianca;
    And her withholds from me, and other more,
    Suitors to her and rivals in my love;
    Supposing it a thing impossible-
    For those defects I have before rehears'd-
    That ever Katherina will be woo'd.
    Therefore this order hath Baptista ta'en,
    That none shall have access unto Bianca
    Till Katherine the curst have got a husband.
  GRUMIO. Katherine the curst!
    A title for a maid of all titles the worst.
  HORTENSIO. Now shall my friend Petruchio do me grace,
    And offer me disguis'd in sober robes
    To old Baptista as a schoolmaster
    Well seen in music, to instruct Bianca;
    That so I may by this device at least
    Have leave and leisure to make love to her,
    And unsuspected court her by herself.

        Enter GREMIO with LUCENTIO disguised as CAMBIO

  GRUMIO. Here's no knavery! See, to beguile the old folks, how the
    young folks lay their heads together! Master, master, look about
    you. Who goes there, ha?
  HORTENSIO. Peace, Grumio! It is the rival of my love. Petruchio,
    stand by awhile.
  GRUMIO. A proper stripling, and an amorous!
                                              [They stand aside]
  GREMIO. O, very well; I have perus'd the note.
    Hark you, sir; I'll have them very fairly bound-
    All books of love, see that at any hand;
    And see you read no other lectures to her.
    You understand me- over and beside
    Signior Baptista's liberality,
    I'll mend it with a largess. Take your paper too,
    And let me have them very well perfum'd;
    For she is sweeter than perfume itself
    To whom they go to. What will you read to her?
  LUCENTIO. Whate'er I read to her, I'll plead for you
    As for my patron, stand you so assur'd,
    As firmly as yourself were still in place;
    Yea, and perhaps with more successful words
    Than you, unless you were a scholar, sir.
  GREMIO. O this learning, what a thing it is!
  GRUMIO. O this woodcock, what an ass it is!
  PETRUCHIO. Peace, sirrah!
  HORTENSIO. Grumio, mum!                       [Coming forward]
    God save you, Signior Gremio!
  GREMIO. And you are well met, Signior Hortensio.
    Trow you whither I am going? To Baptista Minola.
    I promis'd to enquire carefully
    About a schoolmaster for the fair Bianca;
    And by good fortune I have lighted well
    On this young man; for learning and behaviour
    Fit for her turn, well read in poetry
    And other books- good ones, I warrant ye.
  HORTENSIO. 'Tis well; and I have met a gentleman
    Hath promis'd me to help me to another,
    A fine musician to instruct our mistress;
    So shall I no whit be behind in duty
    To fair Bianca, so beloved of me.
  GREMIO. Beloved of me- and that my deeds shall prove.
  GRUMIO. And that his bags shall prove.
  HORTENSIO. Gremio, 'tis now no time to vent our love.
    Listen to me, and if you speak me fair
    I'll tell you news indifferent good for either.
    Here is a gentleman whom by chance I met,
    Upon agreement from us to his liking,
    Will undertake to woo curst Katherine;
    Yea, and to marry her, if her dowry please.
  GREMIO. So said, so done, is well.
    Hortensio, have you told him all her faults?
  PETRUCHIO. I know she is an irksome brawling scold;
    If that be all, masters, I hear no harm.
  GREMIO. No, say'st me so, friend? What countryman?
  PETRUCHIO. Born in Verona, old Antonio's son.
    My father dead, my fortune lives for me;
    And I do hope good days and long to see.
  GREMIO. O Sir, such a life with such a wife were strange!
    But if you have a stomach, to't a God's name;
    You shall have me assisting you in all.
    But will you woo this wild-cat?
  PETRUCHIO. Will I live?
  GRUMIO. Will he woo her? Ay, or I'll hang her.
  PETRUCHIO. Why came I hither but to that intent?
    Think you a little din can daunt mine ears?
    Have I not in my time heard lions roar?
    Have I not heard the sea, puff'd up with winds,
    Rage like an angry boar chafed with sweat?
    Have I not heard great ordnance in the field,
    And heaven's artillery thunder in the skies?
    Have I not in a pitched battle heard
    Loud 'larums, neighing steeds, and trumpets' clang?
    And do you tell me of a woman's tongue,
    That gives not half so great a blow to hear
    As will a chestnut in a fariner's fire?
    Tush! tush! fear boys with bugs.
  GRUMIO. For he fears none.
  GREMIO. Hortensio, hark:
    This gentleman is happily arriv'd,
    My mind presumes, for his own good and ours.
  HORTENSIO. I promis'd we would be contributors
    And bear his charge of wooing, whatsoe'er.
  GREMIO. And so we will- provided that he win her.
  GRUMIO. I would I were as sure of a good dinner.

    Enter TRANIO, bravely apparelled as LUCENTIO, and BIONDELLO

  TRANIO. Gentlemen, God save you! If I may be bold,
    Tell me, I beseech you, which is the readiest way
    To the house of Signior Baptista Minola?
  BIONDELLO. He that has the two fair daughters; is't he you mean?
  TRANIO. Even he, Biondello.
  GREMIO. Hark you, sir, you mean not her to-
  TRANIO. Perhaps him and her, sir; what have you to do?
  PETRUCHIO. Not her that chides, sir, at any hand, I pray.
  TRANIO. I love no chiders, sir. Biondello, let's away.
  LUCENTIO.  [Aside]  Well begun, Tranio.
  HORTENSIO. Sir, a word ere you go.
    Are you a suitor to the maid you talk of, yea or no?
  TRANIO. And if I be, sir, is it any offence?
  GREMIO. No; if without more words you will get you hence.
  TRANIO. Why, sir, I pray, are not the streets as free
    For me as for you?
  GREMIO. But so is not she.

  TRANIO. For what reason, I beseech you?
  GREMIO. For this reason, if you'll know,
    That she's the choice love of Signior Gremio.
  HORTENSIO. That she's the chosen of Signior Hortensio.
  TRANIO. Softly, my masters! If you be gentlemen,
    Do me this right- hear me with patience.
    Baptista is a noble gentleman,
    To whom my father is not all unknown,
    And, were his daughter fairer than she is,
    She may more suitors have, and me for one.
    Fair Leda's daughter had a thousand wooers;
    Then well one more may fair Bianca have;
    And so she shall: Lucentio shall make one,
    Though Paris came in hope to speed alone.
  GREMIO. What, this gentleman will out-talk us all!
  LUCENTIO. Sir, give him head; I know he'll prove a jade.
  PETRUCHIO. Hortensio, to what end are all these words?
  HORTENSIO. Sir, let me be so bold as ask you,
    Did you yet ever see Baptista's daughter?
  TRANIO. No, sir, but hear I do that he hath two:
    The one as famous for a scolding tongue
    As is the other for beauteous modesty.
  PETRUCHIO. Sir, sir, the first's for me; let her go by.
  GREMIO. Yea, leave that labour to great Hercules,
    And let it be more than Alcides' twelve.
  PETRUCHIO. Sir, understand you this of me, in sooth:
    The youngest daughter, whom you hearken for,
    Her father keeps from all access of suitors,
    And will not promise her to any man
    Until the elder sister first be wed.
    The younger then is free, and not before.
  TRANIO. If it be so, sir, that you are the man
    Must stead us all, and me amongst the rest;
    And if you break the ice, and do this feat,
    Achieve the elder, set the younger free
    For our access- whose hap shall be to have her
    Will not so graceless be to be ingrate.
  HORTENSIO. Sir, you say well, and well you do conceive;
    And since you do profess to be a suitor,
    You must, as we do, gratify this gentleman,
    To whom we all rest generally beholding.
  TRANIO. Sir, I shall not be slack; in sign whereof,
    Please ye we may contrive this afternoon,
    And quaff carouses to our mistress' health;
    And do as adversaries do in law-
    Strive mightily, but eat and drink as friends.
  GRUMIO, BIONDELLO. O excellent motion! Fellows, let's be gone.
  HORTENSIO. The motion's good indeed, and be it so.
    Petruchio, I shall be your ben venuto.                Exeunt
                         ACT Il. SCENE I.
                      Padua. BAPTISTA'S house

                    Enter KATHERINA and BIANCA

  BIANCA. Good sister, wrong me not, nor wrong yourself,
    To make a bondmaid and a slave of me-
    That I disdain; but for these other gawds,
    Unbind my hands, I'll pull them off myself,
    Yea, all my raiment, to my petticoat;
    Or what you will command me will I do,
    So well I know my duty to my elders.
  KATHERINA. Of all thy suitors here I charge thee tell
    Whom thou lov'st best. See thou dissemble not.
  BIANCA. Believe me, sister, of all the men alive
    I never yet beheld that special face
    Which I could fancy more than any other.
  KATHERINA. Minion, thou liest. Is't not Hortensio?
  BIANCA. If you affect him, sister, here I swear
    I'll plead for you myself but you shall have him.
  KATHERINA. O then, belike, you fancy riches more:
    You will have Gremio to keep you fair.
  BIANCA. Is it for him you do envy me so?
    Nay, then you jest; and now I well perceive
    You have but jested with me all this while.
    I prithee, sister Kate, untie my hands.
  KATHERINA. [Strikes her]  If that be jest, then an the rest was so.

                            Enter BAPTISTA

  BAPTISTA. Why, how now, dame! Whence grows this insolence?
    Bianca, stand aside- poor girl! she weeps.
                                                [He unbinds her]
    Go ply thy needle; meddle not with her.
    For shame, thou hilding of a devilish spirit,
    Why dost thou wrong her that did ne'er wrong thee?
    When did she cross thee with a bitter word?
  KATHERINA. Her silence flouts me, and I'll be reveng'd.
                                            [Flies after BIANCA]
  BAPTISTA. What, in my sight? Bianca, get thee in.
                                                     Exit BIANCA
  KATHERINA. What, will you not suffer me? Nay, now I see
    She is your treasure, she must have a husband;
    I must dance bare-foot on her wedding-day,
    And for your love to her lead apes in hell.
    Talk not to me; I will go sit and weep,
    Till I can find occasion of revenge.          Exit KATHERINA
  BAPTISTA. Was ever gentleman thus griev'd as I?
    But who comes here?

        Enter GREMIO, with LUCENTIO in the habit of a mean man;
         PETRUCHIO, with HORTENSIO as a musician; and TRANIO,
    as LUCENTIO, with his boy, BIONDELLO, bearing a lute and books

  GREMIO. Good morrow, neighbour Baptista.
  BAPTISTA. Good morrow, neighbour Gremio.
    God save you, gentlemen!
  PETRUCHIO. And you, good sir! Pray, have you not a daughter
    Call'd Katherina, fair and virtuous?
  BAPTISTA. I have a daughter, sir, call'd Katherina.
  GREMIO. You are too blunt; go to it orderly.
  PETRUCHIO. You wrong me, Signior Gremio; give me leave.
    I am a gentleman of Verona, sir,
    That, hearing of her beauty and her wit,
    Her affability and bashful modesty,
    Her wondrous qualities and mild behaviour,
    Am bold to show myself a forward guest
    Within your house, to make mine eye the witness
    Of that report which I so oft have heard.
    And, for an entrance to my entertainment,
    I do present you with a man of mine,
                                          [Presenting HORTENSIO]
    Cunning in music and the mathematics,
    To instruct her fully in those sciences,
    Whereof I know she is not ignorant.
    Accept of him, or else you do me wrong-
    His name is Licio, born in Mantua.
  BAPTISTA. Y'are welcome, sir, and he for your good sake;
    But for my daughter Katherine, this I know,
    She is not for your turn, the more my grief.
  PETRUCHIO. I see you do not mean to part with her;
    Or else you like not of my company.
  BAPTISTA. Mistake me not; I speak but as I find.
    Whence are you, sir? What may I call your name?
  PETRUCHIO. Petruchio is my name, Antonio's son,
    A man well known throughout all Italy.
  BAPTISTA. I know him well; you are welcome for his sake.
  GREMIO. Saving your tale, Petruchio, I pray,
    Let us that are poor petitioners speak too.
    Bacare! you are marvellous forward.
  PETRUCHIO. O, pardon me, Signior Gremio! I would fain be doing.
  GREMIO. I doubt it not, sir; but you will curse your wooing.
    Neighbour, this is a gift very grateful, I am sure of it. To
    express the like kindness, myself, that have been more kindly
    beholding to you than any, freely give unto you this young
    scholar  [Presenting LUCENTIO]  that hath been long studying at
    Rheims; as cunning in Greek, Latin, and other languages, as the
    other in music and mathematics. His name is Cambio. Pray accept
    his service.
  BAPTISTA. A thousand thanks, Signior Gremio. Welcome, good Cambio.
    [To TRANIO]  But, gentle sir, methinks you walk like a stranger.
    May I be so bold to know the cause of your coming?
  TRANIO. Pardon me, sir, the boldness is mine own
    That, being a stranger in this city here,
    Do make myself a suitor to your daughter,
    Unto Bianca, fair and virtuous.
    Nor is your firm resolve unknown to me
    In the preferment of the eldest sister.
    This liberty is all that I request-
    That, upon knowledge of my parentage,
    I may have welcome 'mongst the rest that woo,
    And free access and favour as the rest.
    And toward the education of your daughters
    I here bestow a simple instrument,
    And this small packet of Greek and Latin books.
    If you accept them, then their worth is great.
  BAPTISTA. Lucentio is your name? Of whence, I pray?
  TRANIO. Of Pisa, sir; son to Vincentio.
  BAPTISTA. A mighty man of Pisa. By report
    I know him well. You are very welcome, sir.
    Take you the lute, and you the set of books;
    You shall go see your pupils presently.
    Holla, within!

                         Enter a SERVANT

    Sirrah, lead these gentlemen
    To my daughters; and tell them both
    These are their tutors. Bid them use them well.

                Exit SERVANT leading HORTENSIO carrying the lute
                                     and LUCENTIO with the books

    We will go walk a little in the orchard,
    And then to dinner. You are passing welcome,
    And so I pray you all to think yourselves.
  PETRUCHIO. Signior Baptista, my business asketh haste,
    And every day I cannot come to woo.
    You knew my father well, and in him me,
    Left solely heir to all his lands and goods,
    Which I have bettered rather than decreas'd.
    Then tell me, if I get your daughter's love,
    What dowry shall I have with her to wife?
  BAPTISTA. After my death, the one half of my lands
    And, in possession, twenty thousand crowns.
  PETRUCHIO. And for that dowry, I'll assure her of
    Her widowhood, be it that she survive me,
    In all my lands and leases whatsoever.
    Let specialities be therefore drawn between us,
    That covenants may be kept on either hand.
  BAPTISTA. Ay, when the special thing is well obtain'd,
    That is, her love; for that is all in all.
  PETRUCHIO. Why, that is nothing; for I tell you, father,
    I am as peremptory as she proud-minded;
    And where two raging fires meet together,
    They do consume the thing that feeds their fury.
    Though little fire grows great with little wind,
    Yet extreme gusts will blow out fire and all.
    So I to her, and so she yields to me;
    For I am rough, and woo not like a babe.
  BAPTISTA. Well mayst thou woo, and happy be thy speed
    But be thou arm'd for some unhappy words.
  PETRUCHIO. Ay, to the proof, as mountains are for winds,
    That shake not though they blow perpetually.

             Re-enter HORTENSIO, with his head broke

  BAPTISTA. How now, my friend! Why dost thou look so pale?
  HORTENSIO. For fear, I promise you, if I look pale.
  BAPTISTA. What, will my daughter prove a good musician?
  HORTENSIO. I think she'll sooner prove a soldier:
    Iron may hold with her, but never lutes.
  BAPTISTA. Why, then thou canst not break her to the lute?
  HORTENSIO. Why, no; for she hath broke the lute to me.
    I did but tell her she mistook her frets,
    And bow'd her hand to teach her fingering,
    When, with a most impatient devilish spirit,
    'Frets, call you these?' quoth she 'I'll fume with them.'
    And with that word she struck me on the head,
    And through the instrument my pate made way;
    And there I stood amazed for a while,
    As on a pillory, looking through the lute,
    While she did call me rascal fiddler
    And twangling Jack, with twenty such vile terms,
    As she had studied to misuse me so.
  PETRUCHIO. Now, by the world, it is a lusty wench;
    I love her ten times more than e'er I did.
    O, how I long to have some chat with her!
  BAPTISTA. Well, go with me, and be not so discomfited;
    Proceed in practice with my younger daughter;
    She's apt to learn, and thankful for good turns.
    Signior Petruchio, will you go with us,
    Or shall I send my daughter Kate to you?
  PETRUCHIO. I pray you do.             Exeunt all but PETRUCHIO
    I'll attend her here,
    And woo her with some spirit when she comes.
    Say that she rail; why, then I'll tell her plain
    She sings as sweetly as a nightingale.
    Say that she frown; I'll say she looks as clear
    As morning roses newly wash'd with dew.
    Say she be mute, and will not speak a word;
    Then I'll commend her volubility,
    And say she uttereth piercing eloquence.
    If she do bid me pack, I'll give her thanks,
    As though she bid me stay by her a week;
    If she deny to wed, I'll crave the day
    When I shall ask the banns, and when be married.
    But here she comes; :Lnd.now, Petruchio, speak.

                        Enter KATHERINA

    Good morrow, Kate- for that's your name, I hear.
  KATHERINA. Well have you heard, but something hard of hearing:
    They call me Katherine that do talk of me.
  PETRUCHIO. You lie, in faith, for you are call'd plain Kate,
    And bonny Kate, and sometimes Kate the curst;
    But, Kate, the prettiest Kate in Christendom,
    Kate of Kate Hall, my super-dainty Kate,
    For dainties are all Kates, and therefore, Kate,
    Take this of me, Kate of my consolation-
    Hearing thy mildness prais'd in every town,
    Thy virtues spoke of, and thy beauty sounded,
    Yet not so deeply as to thee belongs,
    Myself am mov'd to woo thee for my wife.
  KATHERINA. Mov'd! in good time! Let him that mov'd you hither
    Remove you hence. I knew you at the first
    You were a moveable.
  PETRUCHIO. Why, what's a moveable?
  KATHERINA. A join'd-stool.
  PETRUCHIO. Thou hast hit it. Come, sit on me.
  KATHERINA. Asses are made to bear, and so are you.
  PETRUCHIO. Women are made to bear, and so are you.
  KATHERINA. No such jade as you, if me you mean.
  PETRUCHIO. Alas, good Kate, I will not burden thee!
    For, knowing thee to be but young and light-
  KATHERINA. Too light for such a swain as you to catch;
    And yet as heavy as my weight should be.
  PETRUCHIO. Should be! should- buzz!
  KATHERINA. Well ta'en, and like a buzzard.
  PETRUCHIO. O, slow-wing'd turtle, shall a buzzard take thee?
  KATHERINA. Ay, for a turtle, as he takes a buzzard.
  PETRUCHIO. Come, come, you wasp; i' faith, you are too angry.
  KATHERINA. If I be waspish, best beware my sting.
  PETRUCHIO. My remedy is then to pluck it out.
  KATHERINA. Ay, if the fool could find it where it lies.
  PETRUCHIO. Who knows not where a wasp does wear his sting?
    In his tail.
  KATHERINA. In his tongue.
  PETRUCHIO. Whose tongue?
  KATHERINA. Yours, if you talk of tales; and so farewell.
  PETRUCHIO. What, with my tongue in your tail? Nay, come again,
    Good Kate; I am a gentleman.
  KATHERINA. That I'll try.                    [She strikes him]
  PETRUCHIO. I swear I'll cuff you, if you strike again.
  KATHERINA. So may you lose your arms.
    If you strike me, you are no gentleman;
    And if no gentleman, why then no arms.
  PETRUCHIO. A herald, Kate? O, put me in thy books!
  KATHERINA. What is your crest- a coxcomb?
  PETRUCHIO. A combless cock, so Kate will be my hen.
  KATHERINA. No cock of mine: you crow too like a craven.
  PETRUCHIO. Nay, come, Kate, come; you must not look so sour.
  KATHERINA. It is my fashion, when I see a crab.
  PETRUCHIO. Why, here's no crab; and therefore look not sour.
  KATHERINA. There is, there is.
  PETRUCHIO. Then show it me.
  KATHERINA. Had I a glass I would.
  PETRUCHIO. What, you mean my face?
  KATHERINA. Well aim'd of such a young one.
  PETRUCHIO. Now, by Saint George, I am too young for you.
  KATHERINA. Yet you are wither'd.
  PETRUCHIO. 'Tis with cares.
  KATHERINA. I care not.
  PETRUCHIO. Nay, hear you, Kate- in sooth, you scape not so.
  KATHERINA. I chafe you, if I tarry; let me go.
  PETRUCHIO. No, not a whit; I find you passing gentle.
    'Twas told me you were rough, and coy, and sullen,
    And now I find report a very liar;
    For thou art pleasant, gamesome, passing courteous,
    But slow in speech, yet sweet as springtime flowers.
    Thou canst not frown, thou canst not look askance,
    Nor bite the lip, as angry wenches will,
    Nor hast thou pleasure to be cross in talk;
    But thou with mildness entertain'st thy wooers;
    With gentle conference, soft and affable.
    Why does the world report that Kate doth limp?
    O sland'rous world! Kate like the hazel-twig
    Is straight and slender, and as brown in hue
    As hazel-nuts, and sweeter than the kernels.
    O, let me see thee walk. Thou dost not halt.
  KATHERINA. Go, fool, and whom thou keep'st command.
  PETRUCHIO. Did ever Dian so become a grove
    As Kate this chamber with her princely gait?
    O, be thou Dian, and let her be Kate;
    And then let Kate be chaste, and Dian sportful!
  KATHERINA. Where did you study all this goodly speech?
  PETRUCHIO. It is extempore, from my mother wit.
  KATHERINA. A witty mother! witless else her son.
  PETRUCHIO. Am I not wise?
  KATHERINA. Yes, keep you warm.
  PETRUCHIO. Marry, so I mean, sweet Katherine, in thy bed.
    And therefore, setting all this chat aside,
    Thus in plain terms: your father hath consented
    That you shall be my wife your dowry greed on;
    And will you, nill you, I will marry you.
    Now, Kate, I am a husband for your turn;
    For, by this light, whereby I see thy beauty,
    Thy beauty that doth make me like thee well,
    Thou must be married to no man but me;
    For I am he am born to tame you, Kate,
    And bring you from a wild Kate to a Kate
    Conformable as other household Kates.

               Re-enter BAPTISTA, GREMIO, and TRANIO

    Here comes your father. Never make denial;
    I must and will have Katherine to my wife.
  BAPTISTA. Now, Signior Petruchio, how speed you with my daughter?
  PETRUCHIO. How but well, sir? how but well?
    It were impossible I should speed amiss.
  BAPTISTA. Why, how now, daughter Katherine, in your dumps?
  KATHERINA. Call you me daughter? Now I promise you
    You have show'd a tender fatherly regard
    To wish me wed to one half lunatic,
    A mad-cap ruffian and a swearing Jack,
    That thinks with oaths to face the matter out.
  PETRUCHIO. Father, 'tis thus: yourself and all the world
    That talk'd of her have talk'd amiss of her.
    If she be curst, it is for policy,
    For,she's not froward, but modest as the dove;
    She is not hot, but temperate as the morn;
    For patience she will prove a second Grissel,
    And Roman Lucrece for her chastity.
    And, to conclude, we have 'greed so well together
    That upon Sunday is the wedding-day.
  KATHERINA. I'll see thee hang'd on Sunday first.
  GREMIO. Hark, Petruchio; she says she'll see thee hang'd first.
  TRANIO. Is this your speeding? Nay, then good-night our part!
  PETRUCHIO. Be patient, gentlemen. I choose her for myself;
    If she and I be pleas'd, what's that to you?
    'Tis bargain'd 'twixt us twain, being alone,
    That she shall still be curst in company.
    I tell you 'tis incredible to believe.
    How much she loves me- O, the kindest Kate!
    She hung about my neck, and kiss on kiss
    She vied so fast, protesting oath on oath,
    That in a twink she won me to her love.
    O, you are novices! 'Tis a world to see,
    How tame, when men and women are alone,
    A meacock wretch can make the curstest shrew.
    Give me thy hand, Kate; I will unto Venice,
    To buy apparel 'gainst the wedding-day.
    Provide the feast, father, and bid the guests;
    I will be sure my Katherine shall be fine.
  BAPTISTA. I know not what to say; but give me your hands.
    God send you joy, Petruchio! 'Tis a match.
  GREMIO, TRANIO. Amen, say we; we will be witnesses.
  PETRUCHIO. Father, and wife, and gentlemen, adieu.
    I will to Venice; Sunday comes apace;
    We will have rings and things, and fine array;
    And kiss me, Kate; we will be married a Sunday.
                        Exeunt PETRUCHIO and KATHERINA severally
  GREMIO. Was ever match clapp'd up so suddenly?
  BAPTISTA. Faith, gentlemen, now I play a merchant's part,
    And venture madly on a desperate mart.
  TRANIO. 'Twas a commodity lay fretting by you;
    'Twill bring you gain, or perish on the seas.
  BAPTISTA. The gain I seek is quiet in the match.
  GREMIO. No doubt but he hath got a quiet catch.
    But now, Baptista, to your younger daughter:
    Now is the day we long have looked for;
    I am your neighbour, and was suitor first.
  TRANIO. And I am one that love Bianca more
    Than words can witness or your thoughts can guess.
  GREMIO. Youngling, thou canst not love so dear as I.
  TRANIO. Greybeard, thy love doth freeze.
  GREMIO. But thine doth fry.
    Skipper, stand back; 'tis age that nourisheth.
  TRANIO. But youth in ladies' eyes that flourisheth.
  BAPTISTA. Content you, gentlemen; I will compound this strife.
    'Tis deeds must win the prize, and he of both
    That can assure my daughter greatest dower
    Shall have my Bianca's love.
    Say, Signior Gremio, what can you assure her?
  GREMIO. First, as you know, my house within the city
    Is richly furnished with plate and gold,
    Basins and ewers to lave her dainty hands;
    My hangings all of Tyrian tapestry;
    In ivory coffers I have stuff'd my crowns;
    In cypress chests my arras counterpoints,
    Costly apparel, tents, and canopies,
    Fine linen, Turkey cushions boss'd with pearl,
    Valance of Venice gold in needle-work;
    Pewter and brass, and all things that belongs
    To house or housekeeping. Then at my farm
    I have a hundred milch-kine to the pail,
    Six score fat oxen standing in my stalls,
    And all things answerable to this portion.
    Myself am struck in years, I must confess;
    And if I die to-morrow this is hers,
    If whilst I live she will be only mine.
  TRANIO. That 'only' came well in. Sir, list to me:
    I am my father's heir and only son;
    If I may have your daughter to my wife,
    I'll leave her houses three or four as good
    Within rich Pisa's walls as any one
    Old Signior Gremio has in Padua;
    Besides two thousand ducats by the year
    Of fruitful land, all which shall be her jointure.
    What, have I pinch'd you, Signior Gremio?
  GREMIO. Two thousand ducats by the year of land!
    [Aside]  My land amounts not to so much in all.-
    That she shall have, besides an argosy
    That now is lying in Marseilles road.
    What, have I chok'd you with an argosy?
  TRANIO. Gremio, 'tis known my father hath no less
    Than three great argosies, besides two galliasses,
    And twelve tight galleys. These I will assure her,
    And twice as much whate'er thou off'rest next.
  GREMIO. Nay, I have off'red all; I have no more;
    And she can have no more than all I have;
    If you like me, she shall have me and mine.
  TRANIO. Why, then the maid is mine from all the world
    By your firm promise; Gremio is out-vied.
  BAPTISTA. I must confess your offer is the best;
    And let your father make her the assurance,
    She is your own. Else, you must pardon me;
    If you should die before him, where's her dower?
  TRANIO. That's but a cavil; he is old, I young.
  GREMIO. And may not young men die as well as old?
  BAPTISTA. Well, gentlemen,
    I am thus resolv'd: on Sunday next you know
    My daughter Katherine is to be married;
    Now, on the Sunday following shall Bianca
    Be bride to you, if you make this assurance;
    If not, to Signior Gremio.
    And so I take my leave, and thank you both.
  GREMIO. Adieu, good neighbour.                   Exit BAPTISTA
    Now, I fear thee not.
    Sirrah young gamester, your father were a fool
    To give thee all, and in his waning age
    Set foot under thy table. Tut, a toy!
    An old Italian fox is not so kind, my boy.              Exit
  TRANIO. A vengeance on your crafty withered hide!
    Yet I have fac'd it with a card of ten.
    'Tis in my head to do my master good:
    I see no reason but suppos'd Lucentio
    Must get a father, call'd suppos'd Vincentio;
    And that's a wonder- fathers commonly
    Do get their children; but in this case of wooing
    A child shall get a sire, if I fail not of my cunning.
                                                            Exit
                        ACT III. SCENE I.
                     Padua. BAPTISTA'S house

    Enter LUCENTIO as CAMBIO, HORTENSIO as LICIO, and BIANCA

  LUCENTIO. Fiddler, forbear; you grow too forward, sir.
    Have you so soon forgot the entertainment
    Her sister Katherine welcome'd you withal?
  HORTENSIO. But, wrangling pedant, this is
    The patroness of heavenly harmony.
    Then give me leave to have prerogative;
    And when in music we have spent an hour,
    Your lecture shall have leisure for as much.
  LUCENTIO. Preposterous ass, that never read so far
    To know the cause why music was ordain'd!
    Was it not to refresh the mind of man
    After his studies or his usual pain?
    Then give me leave to read philosophy,
    And while I pause serve in your harmony.
  HORTENSIO. Sirrah, I will not bear these braves of thine.
  BIANCA. Why, gentlemen, you do me double wrong
    To strive for that which resteth in my choice.
    I arn no breeching scholar in the schools,
    I'll not be tied to hours nor 'pointed times,
    But learn my lessons as I please myself.
    And to cut off all strife: here sit we down;
    Take you your instrument, play you the whiles!
    His lecture will be done ere you have tun'd.
  HORTENSIO. You'll leave his lecture when I am in tune?
  LUCENTIO. That will be never- tune your instrument.
  BIANCA. Where left we last?
  LUCENTIO. Here, madam:
    'Hic ibat Simois, hic est Sigeia tellus,
    Hic steterat Priami regia celsa senis.'
  BIANCA. Construe them.
  LUCENTIO. 'Hic ibat' as I told you before- 'Simois' I am Lucentio-
    'hic est' son unto Vincentio of Pisa- 'Sigeia tellus' disguised
    thus to get your love- 'Hic steterat' and that Lucentio that
    comes a-wooing- 'Priami' is my man Tranio- 'regia' bearing my
    port- 'celsa senis' that we might beguile the old pantaloon.
  HORTENSIO. Madam, my instrument's in tune.
  BIANCA. Let's hear. O fie! the treble jars.
  LUCENTIO. Spit in the hole, man, and tune again.
  BIANCA. Now let me see if I can construe it: 'Hic ibat Simois' I
    know you not- 'hic est Sigeia tellus' I trust you not- 'Hic
    steterat Priami' take heed he hear us not- 'regia' presume not-
   'celsa senis' despair not.
  HORTENSIO. Madam, 'tis now in tune.
  LUCENTIO. All but the bass.
  HORTENSIO. The bass is right; 'tis the base knave that jars.
    [Aside]  How fiery and forward our pedant is!
    Now, for my life, the knave doth court my love.
    Pedascule, I'll watch you better yet.
  BIANCA. In time I may believe, yet I mistrust.
  LUCENTIO. Mistrust it not- for sure, AEacides
    Was Ajax, call'd so from his grandfather.
  BIANCA. I must believe my master; else, I promise you,
    I should be arguing still upon that doubt;
    But let it rest. Now, Licio, to you.
    Good master, take it not unkindly, pray,
    That I have been thus pleasant with you both.
  HORTENSIO.  [To LUCENTIO]  You may go walk and give me leave
      awhile;
    My lessons make no music in three Parts.
  LUCENTIO. Are you so formal, sir? Well, I must wait,
    [Aside]  And watch withal; for, but I be deceiv'd,
    Our fine musician groweth amorous.
  HORTENSIO. Madam, before you touch the instrument
    To learn the order of my fingering,
    I must begin with rudiments of art,
    To teach you gamut in a briefer sort,
    More pleasant, pithy, and effectual,
    Than hath been taught by any of my trade;
    And there it is in writing fairly drawn.
  BIANCA. Why, I am past my gamut long ago.
  HORTENSIO. Yet read the gamut of Hortensio.
  BIANCA.  [Reads]
         '"Gamut" I am, the ground of all accord-
         "A re" to plead Hortensio's passion-
         "B mi" Bianca, take him for thy lord-
         "C fa ut" that loves with all affection-
         "D sol re" one clef, two notes have I-
         "E la mi" show pity or I die.'
    Call you this gamut? Tut, I like it not!
    Old fashions please me best; I am not so nice
    To change true rules for odd inventions.

                       Enter a SERVANT

  SERVANT. Mistress, your father prays you leave your books
    And help to dress your sister's chamber up.
    You know to-morrow is the wedding-day.
  BIANCA. Farewell, sweet masters, both; I must be gone.
                                       Exeunt BIANCA and SERVANT
  LUCENTIO. Faith, mistress, then I have no cause to stay.
                                                            Exit
  HORTENSIO. But I have cause to pry into this pedant;
    Methinks he looks as though he were in love.
    Yet if thy thoughts, Bianca, be so humble
    To cast thy wand'ring eyes on every stale-
    Seize thee that list. If once I find thee ranging,
  HORTENSIO will be quit with thee by changing.             Exit
                           SCENE II.
                Padua. Before BAPTISTA'So house

    Enter BAPTISTA, GREMIO, TRANIO as LUCENTIO, KATHERINA, BIANCA,
              LUCENTIO as CAMBIO, and ATTENDANTS

  BAPTISTA.  [To TRANIO]  Signior Lucentio, this is the 'pointed day
    That Katherine and Petruchio should be married,
    And yet we hear not of our son-in-law.
    What will be said? What mockery will it be
    To want the bridegroom when the priest attends
    To speak the ceremonial rites of marriage!
    What says Lucentio to this shame of ours?
  KATHERINA. No shame but mine; I must, forsooth, be forc'd
    To give my hand, oppos'd against my heart,
    Unto a mad-brain rudesby, full of spleen,
    Who woo'd in haste and means to wed at leisure.
    I told you, I, he was a frantic fool,
    Hiding his bitter jests in blunt behaviour;
    And, to be noted for a merry man,
    He'll woo a thousand, 'point the day of marriage,
    Make friends invited, and proclaim the banns;
    Yet never means to wed where he hath woo'd.
    Now must the world point at poor Katherine,
    And say 'Lo, there is mad Petruchio's wife,
    If it would please him come and marry her!'
  TRANIO. Patience, good Katherine, and Baptista too.
    Upon my life, Petruchio means but well,
    Whatever fortune stays him from his word.
    Though he be blunt, I know him passing wise;
    Though he be merry, yet withal he's honest.
  KATHERINA. Would Katherine had never seen him though!
                    Exit, weeping, followed by BIANCA and others
  BAPTISTA. Go, girl, I cannot blame thee now to weep,
    For such an injury would vex a very saint;
    Much more a shrew of thy impatient humour.

                           Enter BIONDELLO

    Master, master! News, and such old news as you never heard of!
  BAPTISTA. Is it new and old too? How may that be?
  BIONDELLO. Why, is it not news to hear of Petruchio's coming?
  BAPTISTA. Is he come?
  BIONDELLO. Why, no, sir.
  BAPTISTA. What then?
  BIONDELLO. He is coming.
  BAPTISTA. When will he be here?
  BIONDELLO. When he stands where I am and sees you there.
  TRANIO. But, say, what to thine old news?
  BIONDELLO. Why, Petruchio is coming- in a new hat and an old
    jerkin; a pair of old breeches thrice turn'd; a pair of boots
    that have been candle-cases, one buckled, another lac'd; an old
    rusty sword ta'en out of the town armoury, with a broken hilt,
    and chapeless; with two broken points; his horse hipp'd, with an
    old motley saddle and stirrups of no kindred; besides, possess'd
    with the glanders and like to mose in the chine, troubled with
    the lampass, infected with the fashions, full of windgalls, sped
    with spavins, rayed with the yellows, past cure of the fives,
    stark spoil'd with the staggers, begnawn with the bots, sway'd in
    the back and shoulder-shotten, near-legg'd before, and with a
    half-cheek'd bit, and a head-stall of sheep's leather which,
    being restrained to keep him from stumbling, hath been often
    burst, and now repaired with knots; one girth six times piec'd,
    and a woman's crupper of velure, which hath two letters for her
    name fairly set down in studs, and here and there piec'd with
    pack-thread.
  BAPTISTA. Who comes with him?
  BIONDELLO. O, sir, his lackey, for all the world caparison'd like
    the horse- with a linen stock on one leg and a kersey boot-hose
    on the other, gart'red with a red and blue list; an old hat, and
    the humour of forty fancies prick'd in't for a feather; a
    monster, a very monster in apparel, and not like a Christian
    footboy or a gentleman's lackey.
  TRANIO. 'Tis some odd humour pricks him to this fashion;
    Yet oftentimes lie goes but mean-apparell'd.
  BAPTISTA. I am glad he's come, howsoe'er he comes.
  BIONDELLO. Why, sir, he comes not.
  BAPTISTA. Didst thou not say he comes?
  BIONDELLO. Who? that Petruchio came?
  BAPTISTA. Ay, that Petruchio came.
  BIONDELLO. No, sir; I say his horse comes with him on his back.
  BAPTISTA. Why, that's all one.
  BIONDELLO. Nay, by Saint Jamy,
             I hold you a penny,
             A horse and a man
             Is more than one,
             And yet not many.

                  Enter PETRUCHIO and GRUMIO

  PETRUCHIO. Come, where be these gallants? Who's at home?
  BAPTISTA. You are welcome, sir.
  PETRUCHIO. And yet I come not well.
  BAPTISTA. And yet you halt not.
  TRANIO. Not so well apparell'd
    As I wish you were.
  PETRUCHIO. Were it better, I should rush in thus.
    But where is Kate? Where is my lovely bride?
    How does my father? Gentles, methinks you frown;
    And wherefore gaze this goodly company
    As if they saw some wondrous monument,
    Some comet or unusual prodigy?
  BAPTISTA. Why, sir, you know this is your wedding-day.
    First were we sad, fearing you would not come;
    Now sadder, that you come so unprovided.
    Fie, doff this habit, shame to your estate,
    An eye-sore to our solemn festival!
  TRANIO. And tell us what occasion of import
    Hath all so long detain'd you from your wife,
    And sent you hither so unlike yourself?
  PETRUCHIO. Tedious it were to tell, and harsh to hear;
    Sufficeth I am come to keep my word,
    Though in some part enforced to digress,
    Which at more leisure I will so excuse
    As you shall well be satisfied withal.
    But where is Kate? I stay too long from her;
    The morning wears, 'tis time we were at church.
  TRANIO. See not your bride in these unreverent robes;
    Go to my chamber, put on clothes of mine.
  PETRUCHIO. Not I, believe me; thus I'll visit her.
  BAPTISTA. But thus, I trust, you will not marry her.
  PETRUCHIO. Good sooth, even thus; therefore ha' done with words;
    To me she's married, not unto my clothes.
    Could I repair what she will wear in me
    As I can change these poor accoutrements,
    'Twere well for Kate and better for myself.
    But what a fool am I to chat with you,
    When I should bid good-morrow to my bride
    And seal the title with a lovely kiss!
                                  Exeunt PETRUCHIO and PETRUCHIO
  TRANIO. He hath some meaning in his mad attire.
    We will persuade him, be it possible,
    To put on better ere he go to church.
  BAPTISTA. I'll after him and see the event of this.
              Exeunt BAPTISTA, GREMIO, BIONDELLO, and ATTENDENTS
  TRANIO. But to her love concerneth us to ad
    Her father's liking; which to bring to pass,
    As I before imparted to your worship,
    I am to get a man- whate'er he be
    It skills not much; we'll fit him to our turn-
    And he shall be Vincentio of Pisa,
    And make assurance here in Padua
    Of greater sums than I have promised.
    So shall you quietly enjoy your hope
    And marry sweet Bianca with consent.
  LUCENTIO. Were it not that my fellow schoolmaster
    Doth watch Bianca's steps so narrowly,
    'Twere good, methinks, to steal our marriage;
    Which once perform'd, let all the world say no,
    I'll keep mine own despite of all the world.
  TRANIO. That by degrees we mean to look into
    And watch our vantage in this business;
    We'll over-reach the greybeard, Gremio,
    The narrow-prying father, Minola,
    The quaint musician, amorous Licio-
    All for my master's sake, Lucentio.

                           Re-enter GREMIO

    Signior Gremio, came you from the church?
  GREMIO. As willingly as e'er I came from school.
  TRANIO. And is the bride and bridegroom coming home?
  GREMIO. A bridegroom, say you? 'Tis a groom indeed,
    A grumbling groom, and that the girl shall find.
  TRANIO. Curster than she? Why, 'tis impossible.
  GREMIO. Why, he's a devil, a devil, a very fiend.
  TRANIO. Why, she's a devil, a devil, the devil's dam.
  GREMIO. Tut, she's a lamb, a dove, a fool, to him!
    I'll tell you, Sir Lucentio: when the priest
    Should ask if Katherine should be his wife,
    'Ay, by gogs-wouns' quoth he, and swore so loud
    That, all amaz'd, the priest let fall the book;
    And as he stoop'd again to take it up,
    This mad-brain'd bridegroom took him such a cuff
    That down fell priest and book, and book and priest.
    'Now take them up,' quoth he 'if any list.'
  TRANIO. What said the wench, when he rose again?
  GREMIO. Trembled and shook, for why he stamp'd and swore
    As if the vicar meant to cozen him.
    But after many ceremonies done
    He calls for wine: 'A health!' quoth he, as if
    He had been abroad, carousing to his mates
    After a storm; quaff'd off the muscadel,
    And threw the sops all in the sexton's face,
    Having no other reason
    But that his beard grew thin and hungerly
    And seem'd to ask him sops as he was drinking.
    This done, he took the bride about the neck,
    And kiss'd her lips with such a clamorous smack
    That at the parting all the church did echo.
    And I, seeing this, came thence for very shame;
    And after me, I know, the rout is coming.
    Such a mad marriage never was before.
    Hark, hark! I hear the minstrels play.         [Music plays]

       Enter PETRUCHIO, KATHERINA, BIANCA, BAPTISTA, HORTENSIO,
                         GRUMIO, and train

  PETRUCHIO. Gentlemen and friends, I thank you for your pains.
    I know you think to dine with me to-day,
    And have prepar'd great store of wedding cheer
    But so it is- my haste doth call me hence,
    And therefore here I mean to take my leave.
  BAPTISTA. Is't possible you will away to-night?
  PETRUCHIO. I must away to-day before night come.
    Make it no wonder; if you knew my business,
    You would entreat me rather go than stay.
    And, honest company, I thank you all
    That have beheld me give away myself
    To this most patient, sweet, and virtuous wife.
    Dine with my father, drink a health to me.
    For I must hence; and farewell to you all.
  TRANIO. Let us entreat you stay till after dinner.
  PETRUCHIO. It may not be.
  GREMIO. Let me entreat you.
  PETRUCHIO. It cannot be.
  KATHERINA. Let me entreat you.
  PETRUCHIO. I am content.
  KATHERINA. Are you content to stay?
  PETRUCHIO. I am content you shall entreat me stay;
    But yet not stay, entreat me how you can.
  KATHERINA. Now, if you love me, stay.
  PETRUCHIO. Grumio, my horse.
  GRUMIO. Ay, sir, they be ready; the oats have eaten the horses.
  KATHERINA. Nay, then,
    Do what thou canst, I will not go to-day;
    No, nor to-morrow, not till I please myself.
    The door is open, sir; there lies your way;
    You may be jogging whiles your boots are green;
    For me, I'll not be gone till I please myself.
    'Tis like you'll prove a jolly surly groom
    That take it on you at the first so roundly.
  PETRUCHIO. O Kate, content thee; prithee be not angry.
  KATHERINA. I will be angry; what hast thou to do?
    Father, be quiet; he shall stay my leisure.
  GREMIO. Ay, marry, sir, now it begins to work.
  KATHERINA. Gentlemen, forward to the bridal dinner.
    I see a woman may be made a fool
    If she had not a spirit to resist.
  PETRUCHIO. They shall go forward, Kate, at thy command.
    Obey the bride, you that attend on her;
    Go to the feast, revel and domineer,
    Carouse full measure to her maidenhead;
    Be mad and merry, or go hang yourselves.
    But for my bonny Kate, she must with me.
    Nay, look not big, nor stamp, nor stare, nor fret;
    I will be master of what is mine own-
    She is my goods, my chattels, she is my house,
    My household stuff, my field, my barn,
    My horse, my ox, my ass, my any thing,
    And here she stands; touch her whoever dare;
    I'll bring mine action on the proudest he
    That stops my way in Padua. Grumio,
    Draw forth thy weapon; we are beset with thieves;
    Rescue thy mistress, if thou be a man.
    Fear not, sweet wench; they shall not touch thee, Kate;
    I'll buckler thee against a million.
                         Exeunt PETRUCHIO, KATHERINA, and GRUMIO
  BAPTISTA. Nay, let them go, a couple of quiet ones.
  GREMIO. Went they not quickly, I should die with laughing.
  TRANIO. Of all mad matches, never was the like.
  LUCENTIO. Mistress, what's your opinion of your sister?
  BIANCA. That, being mad herself, she's madly mated.
  GREMIO. I warrant him, Petruchio is Kated.
  BAPTISTA. Neighbours and friends, though bride and bridegroom wants
    For to supply the places at the table,
    You know there wants no junkets at the feast.
    Lucentio, you shall supply the bridegroom's place;
    And let Bianca take her sister's room.
  TRANIO. Shall sweet Bianca practise how to bride it?
  BAPTISTA. She shall, Lucentio. Come, gentlemen, let's go.
                                                          Exeunt
                        ACT IV. SCENE I.
                    PETRUCHIO'S country house

                           Enter GRUMIO

  GRUMIO. Fie, fie on all tired jades, on all mad masters, and all
    foul ways! Was ever man so beaten? Was ever man so ray'd? Was
    ever man so weary? I am sent before to make a fire, and they are
    coming after to warm them. Now were not I a little pot and soon
    hot, my very lips might freeze to my teeth, my tongue to the roof
    of my mouth, my heart in my belly, ere I should come by a fire to
    thaw me. But I with blowing the fire shall warm myself; for,
    considering the weather, a taller man than I will take cold.
    Holla, ho! Curtis!

                            Enter CURTIS

  CURTIS. Who is that calls so coldly?
  GRUMIO. A piece of ice. If thou doubt it, thou mayst slide from my
    shoulder to my heel with no greater a run but my head and my
    neck. A fire, good Curtis.
  CURTIS. Is my master and his wife coming, Grumio?
  GRUMIO. O, ay, Curtis, ay; and therefore fire, fire; cast on no
    water.
  CURTIS. Is she so hot a shrew as she's reported?
  GRUMIO. She was, good Curtis, before this frost; but thou know'st
    winter tames man, woman, and beast; for it hath tam'd my old
    master, and my new mistress, and myself, fellow Curtis.
  CURTIS. Away, you three-inch fool! I am no beast.
  GRUMIO. Am I but three inches? Why, thy horn is a foot, and so long
    am I at the least. But wilt thou make a fire, or shall I complain
    on thee to our mistress, whose hand- she being now at hand- thou
    shalt soon feel, to thy cold comfort, for being slow in thy hot
    office?
  CURTIS. I prithee, good Grumio, tell me how goes the world?
  GRUMIO. A cold world, Curtis, in every office but thine; and
    therefore fire. Do thy duty, and have thy duty, for my master and
    mistress are almost frozen to death.
  CURTIS. There's fire ready; and therefore, good Grumio, the news?
  GRUMIO. Why, 'Jack boy! ho, boy!' and as much news as thou wilt.
  CURTIS. Come, you are so full of cony-catching!
  GRUMIO. Why, therefore, fire; for I have caught extreme cold.
    Where's the cook? Is supper ready, the house trimm'd, rushes
    strew'd, cobwebs swept, the serving-men in their new fustian,
    their white stockings, and every officer his wedding-garment on?
    Be the jacks fair within, the jills fair without, the carpets
    laid, and everything in order?
  CURTIS. All ready; and therefore, I pray thee, news.
  GRUMIO. First know my horse is tired; my master and mistress fall'n
    out.
  CURTIS. How?
  GRUMIO. Out of their saddles into the dirt; and thereby hangs a
    tale.
  CURTIS. Let's ha't, good Grumio.
  GRUMIO. Lend thine ear.
  CURTIS. Here.
  GRUMIO. There.                                  [Striking him]
  CURTIS. This 'tis to feel a tale, not to hear a tale.
  GRUMIO. And therefore 'tis call'd a sensible tale; and this cuff
    was but to knock at your car and beseech list'ning. Now I begin:
    Imprimis, we came down a foul hill, my master riding behind my
    mistress-
  CURTIS. Both of one horse?
  GRUMIO. What's that to thee?
  CURTIS. Why, a horse.
  GRUMIO. Tell thou the tale. But hadst thou not cross'd me, thou
    shouldst have heard how her horse fell and she under her horse;
    thou shouldst have heard in how miry a place, how she was
    bemoil'd, how he left her with the horse upon her, how he beat me
    because her horse stumbled, how she waded through the dirt to
    pluck him off me, how he swore, how she pray'd that never pray'd
    before, how I cried, how the horses ran away, how her bridle was
    burst, how I lost my crupper- with many things of worthy memory,
    which now shall die in oblivion, and thou return unexperienc'd to
    thy grave.
  CURTIS. By this reck'ning he is more shrew than she.
  GRUMIO. Ay, and that thou and the proudest of you all shall find
    when he comes home. But what talk I of this? Call forth
    Nathaniel, Joseph, Nicholas, Philip, Walter, Sugarsop, and the
    rest; let their heads be sleekly comb'd, their blue coats brush'd
    and their garters of an indifferent knit; let them curtsy with
    their left legs, and not presume to touch a hair of my mastcr's
    horse-tail till they kiss their hands. Are they all ready?
  CURTIS. They are.
  GRUMIO. Call them forth.
  CURTIS. Do you hear, ho? You must meet my master, to countenance my
    mistress.
  GRUMIO. Why, she hath a face of her own.
  CURTIS. Who knows not that?
  GRUMIO. Thou, it seems, that calls for company to countenance her.
  CURTIS. I call them forth to credit her.
  GRUMIO. Why, she comes to borrow nothing of them.

                     Enter four or five SERVINGMEN

  NATHANIEL. Welcome home, Grumio!
  PHILIP. How now, Grumio!
  JOSEPH. What, Grumio!
  NICHOLAS. Fellow Grumio!
  NATHANIEL. How now, old lad!
  GRUMIO. Welcome, you!- how now, you!- what, you!- fellow, you!- and
    thus much for greeting. Now, my spruce companions, is all ready,
    and all things neat?
  NATHANIEL. All things is ready. How near is our master?
  GRUMIO. E'en at hand, alighted by this; and therefore be not-
   Cock's passion, silence! I hear my master.

                     Enter PETRUCHIO and KATHERINA

  PETRUCHIO. Where be these knaves? What, no man at door
    To hold my stirrup nor to take my horse!
    Where is Nathaniel, Gregory, Philip?
  ALL SERVANTS. Here, here, sir; here, sir.
  PETRUCHIO. Here, sir! here, sir! here, sir! here, sir!
    You logger-headed and unpolish'd grooms!
    What, no attendance? no regard? no duty?
    Where is the foolish knave I sent before?
  GRUMIO. Here, sir; as foolish as I was before.
  PETRUCHIO. YOU peasant swain! you whoreson malt-horse drudge!
    Did I not bid thee meet me in the park
    And bring along these rascal knaves with thee?
  GRUMIO. Nathaniel's coat, sir, was not fully made,
    And Gabriel's pumps were all unpink'd i' th' heel;
    There was no link to colour Peter's hat,
    And Walter's dagger was not come from sheathing;
    There were none fine but Adam, Ralph, and Gregory;
    The rest were ragged, old, and beggarly;
    Yet, as they are, here are they come to meet you.
  PETRUCHIO. Go, rascals, go and fetch my supper in.
                                   Exeunt some of the SERVINGMEN

    [Sings]  Where is the life that late I led?
             Where are those-

    Sit down, Kate, and welcome. Soud, soud, soud, soud!

                 Re-enter SERVANTS with supper

    Why, when, I say? Nay, good sweet Kate, be merry.
    Off with my boots, you rogues! you villains, when?

    [Sings]  It was the friar of orders grey,
             As he forth walked on his way-

    Out, you rogue! you pluck my foot awry;
    Take that, and mend the plucking off the other.
                                                   [Strikes him]
    Be merry, Kate. Some water, here, what, ho!

                      Enter one with water

    Where's my spaniel Troilus? Sirrah, get you hence,
    And bid my cousin Ferdinand come hither:
                                                 Exit SERVINGMAN
    One, Kate, that you must kiss and be acquainted with.
    Where are my slippers? Shall I have some water?
    Come, Kate, and wash, and welcome heartily.
    You whoreson villain! will you let it fall?    [Strikes him]
  KATHERINA. Patience, I pray you; 'twas a fault unwilling.
  PETRUCHIO. A whoreson, beetle-headed, flap-ear'd knave!
    Come, Kate, sit down; I know you have a stomach.
    Will you give thanks, sweet Kate, or else shall I?
    What's this? Mutton?
  FIRST SERVANT. Ay.
  PETRUCHIO. Who brought it?
  PETER. I.
  PETRUCHIO. 'Tis burnt; and so is all the meat.
    What dogs are these? Where is the rascal cook?
    How durst you villains bring it from the dresser
    And serve it thus to me that love it not?
    There, take it to you, trenchers, cups, and all;
                                [Throws the meat, etc., at them]
    You heedless joltheads and unmanner'd slaves!
    What, do you grumble? I'll be with you straight.
                                                 Exeunt SERVANTS
  KATHERINA. I pray you, husband, be not so disquiet;
    The meat was well, if you were so contented.
  PETRUCHIO. I tell thee, Kate, 'twas burnt and dried away,
    And I expressly am forbid to touch it;
    For it engenders choler, planteth anger;
    And better 'twere that both of us did fast,
    Since, of ourselves, ourselves are choleric,
    Than feed it with such over-roasted flesh.
    Be patient; to-morrow 't shall be mended.
    And for this night we'll fast for company.
    Come, I will bring thee to thy bridal chamber.        Exeunt

                     Re-enter SERVANTS severally

  NATHANIEL. Peter, didst ever see the like?
  PETER. He kills her in her own humour.

                            Re-enter CURTIS

  GRUMIO. Where is he?
  CURTIS. In her chamber. Making a sermon of continency to her,
    And rails, and swears, and rates, that she, poor soul,
    Knows not which way to stand, to look, to speak.
    And sits as one new risen from a dream.
    Away, away! for he is coming hither.                  Exeunt

                       Re-enter PETRUCHIO

  PETRUCHIO. Thus have I politicly begun my reign,
    And 'tis my hope to end successfully.
    My falcon now is sharp and passing empty.
    And till she stoop she must not be full-gorg'd,
    For then she never looks upon her lure.
    Another way I have to man my haggard,
    To make her come, and know her keeper's call,
    That is, to watch her, as we watch these kites
    That bate and beat, and will not be obedient.
    She eat no meat to-day, nor none shall eat;
    Last night she slept not, nor to-night she shall not;
    As with the meat, some undeserved fault
    I'll find about the making of the bed;
    And here I'll fling the pillow, there the bolster,
    This way the coverlet, another way the sheets;
    Ay, and amid this hurly I intend
    That all is done in reverend care of her-
    And, in conclusion, she shall watch all night;
    And if she chance to nod I'll rail and brawl
    And with the clamour keep her still awake.
    This is a way to kill a wife with kindness,
    And thus I'll curb her mad and headstrong humour.
    He that knows better how to tame a shrew,
    Now let him speak; 'tis charity to show.                Exit
                              SCENE II.
                   Padua. Before BAPTISTA'S house

         Enter TRANIO as LUCENTIO, and HORTENSIO as LICIO

  TRANIO. Is 't possible, friend Licio, that Mistress Bianca
    Doth fancy any other but Lucentio?
    I tell you, sir, she bears me fair in hand.
  HORTENSIO. Sir, to satisfy you in what I have said,
    Stand by and mark the manner of his teaching.
                                              [They stand aside]

               Enter BIANCA, and LUCENTIO as CAMBIO

  LUCENTIO. Now, mistress, profit you in what you read?
  BIANCA. What, master, read you, First resolve me that.
  LUCENTIO. I read that I profess, 'The Art to Love.'
  BIANCA. And may you prove, sir, master of your art!
  LUCENTIO. While you, sweet dear, prove mistress of my heart.
                                                   [They retire]
  HORTENSIO. Quick proceeders, marry! Now tell me, I pray,
    You that durst swear that your Mistress Blanca
    Lov'd none in the world so well as Lucentio.
  TRANIO. O despiteful love! unconstant womankind!
    I tell thee, Licio, this is wonderful.
  HORTENSIO. Mistake no more; I am not Licio.
    Nor a musician as I seem to be;
    But one that scorn to live in this disguise
    For such a one as leaves a gentleman
    And makes a god of such a cullion.
    Know, sir, that I am call'd Hortensio.
  TRANIO. Signior Hortensio, I have often heard
    Of your entire affection to Bianca;
    And since mine eyes are witness of her lightness,
    I will with you, if you be so contented,
    Forswear Bianca and her love for ever.
  HORTENSIO. See, how they kiss and court! Signior Lucentio,
    Here is my hand, and here I firmly vow
    Never to woo her more, but do forswear her,
    As one unworthy all the former favours
    That I have fondly flatter'd her withal.
  TRANIO. And here I take the like unfeigned oath,
    Never to marry with her though she would entreat;
    Fie on her! See how beastly she doth court him!
  HORTENSIO. Would all the world but he had quite forsworn!
    For me, that I may surely keep mine oath,
    I will be married to a wealtlly widow
    Ere three days pass, which hath as long lov'd me
    As I have lov'd this proud disdainful haggard.
    And so farewell, Signior Lucentio.
    Kindness in women, not their beauteous looks,
    Shall win my love; and so I take my leave,
    In resolution as I swore before.                        Exit
  TRANIO. Mistress Bianca, bless you with such grace
    As 'longeth to a lover's blessed case!
    Nay, I have ta'en you napping, gentle love,
    And have forsworn you with Hortensio.
  BIANCA. Tranio, you jest; but have you both forsworn me?
  TRANIO. Mistress, we have.
  LUCENTIO. Then we are rid of Licio.
  TRANIO. I' faith, he'll have a lusty widow now,
    That shall be woo'd and wedded in a day.
  BIANCA. God give him joy!
  TRANIO. Ay, and he'll tame her.
  BIANCA. He says so, Tranio.
  TRANIO. Faith, he is gone unto the taming-school.
  BIANCA. The taming-school! What, is there such a place?
  TRANIO. Ay, mistress; and Petruchio is the master,
    That teacheth tricks eleven and twenty long,
    To tame a shrew and charm her chattering tongue.

                       Enter BIONDELLO

  BIONDELLO. O master, master, have watch'd so long
    That I am dog-weary; but at last I spied
    An ancient angel coming down the hill
    Will serve the turn.
  TRANIO. What is he, Biondello?
  BIONDELLO. Master, a mercatante or a pedant,
    I know not what; but formal in apparel,
    In gait and countenance surely like a father.
  LUCENTIO. And what of him, Tranio?
  TRANIO. If he be credulous and trust my tale,
    I'll make him glad to seem Vincentio,
    And give assurance to Baptista Minola
    As if he were the right Vincentio.
    Take in your love, and then let me alone.
                                      Exeunt LUCENTIO and BIANCA

                         Enter a PEDANT

  PEDANT. God save you, sir!
  TRANIO. And you, sir; you are welcome.
    Travel you far on, or are you at the farthest?
  PEDANT. Sir, at the farthest for a week or two;
    But then up farther, and as far as Rome;
    And so to Tripoli, if God lend me life.
  TRANIO. What countryman, I pray?
  PEDANT. Of Mantua.
  TRANIO. Of Mantua, sir? Marry, God forbid,
    And come to Padua, careless of your life!
  PEDANT. My life, sir! How, I pray? For that goes hard.
  TRANIO. 'Tis death for any one in Mantua
    To come to Padua. Know you not the cause?
    Your ships are stay'd at Venice; and the Duke,
    For private quarrel 'twixt your Duke and him,
    Hath publish'd and proclaim'd it openly.
    'Tis marvel- but that you are but newly come,
    You might have heard it else proclaim'd about.
  PEDANT. Alas, sir, it is worse for me than so!
    For I have bills for money by exchange
    From Florence, and must here deliver them.
  TRANIO. Well, sir, to do you courtesy,
    This will I do, and this I will advise you-
    First, tell me, have you ever been at Pisa?
  PEDANT. Ay, sir, in Pisa have I often been,
    Pisa renowned for grave citizens.
  TRANIO. Among them know you one Vincentio?
  PEDANT. I know him not, but I have heard of him,
    A merchant of incomparable wealth.
  TRANIO. He is my father, sir; and, sooth to say,
    In count'nance somewhat doth resemble you.
  BIONDELLO.  [Aside]  As much as an apple doth an oyster, and all
    one.
  TRANIO. To save your life in this extremity,
    This favour will I do you for his sake;
    And think it not the worst of all your fortunes
    That you are like to Sir Vincentio.
    His name and credit shall you undertake,
    And in my house you shall be friendly lodg'd;
    Look that you take upon you as you should.
    You understand me, sir. So shall you stay
    Till you have done your business in the city.
    If this be court'sy, sir, accept of it.
  PEDANT. O, sir, I do; and will repute you ever
    The patron of my life and liberty.
  TRANIO. Then go with me to make the matter good.
    This, by the way, I let you understand:
    My father is here look'd for every day
    To pass assurance of a dow'r in marriage
    'Twixt me and one Baptista's daughter here.
    In all these circumstances I'll instruct you.
    Go with me to clothe you as becomes you.              Exeunt
                             SCENE III.
                          PETRUCHIO'S house

                    Enter KATHERINA and GRUMIO

  GRUMIO. No, no, forsooth; I dare not for my life.
  KATHERINA. The more my wrong, the more his spite appears.
    What, did he marry me to famish me?
    Beggars that come unto my father's door
    Upon entreaty have a present alms;
    If not, elsewhere they meet with charity;
    But I, who never knew how to entreat,
    Nor never needed that I should entreat,
    Am starv'd for meat, giddy for lack of sleep;
    With oaths kept waking, and with brawling fed;
    And that which spites me more than all these wants-
    He does it under name of perfect love;
    As who should say, if I should sleep or eat,
    'Twere deadly sickness or else present death.
    I prithee go and get me some repast;
    I care not what, so it be wholesome food.
  GRUMIO. What say you to a neat's foot?
  KATHERINA. 'Tis passing good; I prithee let me have it.
  GRUMIO. I fear it is too choleric a meat.
    How say you to a fat tripe finely broil'd?
  KATHERINA. I like it well; good Grumio, fetch it me.
  GRUMIO. I cannot tell; I fear 'tis choleric.
    What say you to a piece of beef and mustard?
  KATHERINA. A dish that I do love to feed upon.
  GRUMIO. Ay, but the mustard is too hot a little.
  KATHERINA. Why then the beef, and let the mustard rest.
  GRUMIO. Nay, then I will not; you shall have the mustard,
    Or else you get no beef of Grumio.
  KATHERINA. Then both, or one, or anything thou wilt.
  GRUMIO. Why then the mustard without the beef.
  KATHERINA. Go, get thee gone, thou false deluding slave,
                                                     [Beats him]
    That feed'st me with the very name of meat.
    Sorrow on thee and all the pack of you
    That triumph thus upon my misery!
    Go, get thee gone, I say.

               Enter PETRUCHIO, and HORTENSIO with meat

  PETRUCHIO. How fares my Kate? What, sweeting, all amort?
  HORTENSIO. Mistress, what cheer?
  KATHERINA. Faith, as cold as can be.
  PETRUCHIO. Pluck up thy spirits, look cheerfully upon me.
    Here, love, thou seest how diligent I am,
    To dress thy meat myself, and bring it thee.
    I am sure, sweet Kate, this kindness merits thanks.
    What, not a word? Nay, then thou lov'st it not,
    And all my pains is sorted to no proof.
    Here, take away this dish.
  KATHERINA. I pray you, let it stand.
  PETRUCHIO. The poorest service is repaid with thanks;
    And so shall mine, before you touch the meat.
  KATHERINA. I thank you, sir.
  HORTENSIO. Signior Petruchio, fie! you are to blame.
    Come, Mistress Kate, I'll bear you company.
  PETRUCHIO.  [Aside]  Eat it up all, Hortensio, if thou lovest me.-
    Much good do it unto thy gentle heart!
    Kate, eat apace. And now, my honey love,
    Will we return unto thy father's house
    And revel it as bravely as the best,
    With silken coats and caps, and golden rings,
    With ruffs and cuffs and farthingales and things,
    With scarfs and fans and double change of brav'ry.
    With amber bracelets, beads, and all this knav'ry.
    What, hast thou din'd? The tailor stays thy leisure,
    To deck thy body with his ruffling treasure.

                          Enter TAILOR

    Come, tailor, let us see these ornaments;
    Lay forth the gown.

                        Enter HABERDASHER

    What news with you, sir?
  HABERDASHER. Here is the cap your worship did bespeak.
  PETRUCHIO. Why, this was moulded on a porringer;
    A velvet dish. Fie, fie! 'tis lewd and filthy;
    Why, 'tis a cockle or a walnut-shell,
    A knack, a toy, a trick, a baby's cap.
    Away with it. Come, let me have a bigger.
  KATHERINA. I'll have no bigger; this doth fit the time,
    And gentlewomen wear such caps as these.
  PETRUCHIO. When you are gentle, you shall have one too,
    And not till then.
  HORTENSIO.  [Aside]  That will not be in haste.
  KATHERINA. Why, sir, I trust I may have leave to speak;
    And speak I will. I am no child, no babe.
    Your betters have endur'd me say my mind,
    And if you cannot, best you stop your ears.
    My tongue will tell the anger of my heart,
    Or else my heart, concealing it, will break;
    And rather than it shall, I will be free
    Even to the uttermost, as I please, in words.
  PETRUCHIO. Why, thou say'st true; it is a paltry cap,
    A custard-coffin, a bauble, a silken pie;
    I love thee well in that thou lik'st it not.
  KATHERINA. Love me or love me not, I like the cap;
    And it I will have, or I will have none.    Exit HABERDASHER
  PETRUCHIO. Thy gown? Why, ay. Come, tailor, let us see't.
    O mercy, God! what masquing stuff is here?
    What's this? A sleeve? 'Tis like a demi-cannon.
    What, up and down, carv'd like an appletart?
    Here's snip and nip and cut and slish and slash,
    Like to a censer in a barber's shop.
    Why, what a devil's name, tailor, call'st thou this?
  HORTENSIO.  [Aside]  I see she's like to have neither cap nor gown.
  TAILOR. You bid me make it orderly and well,
    According to the fashion and the time.
  PETRUCHIO. Marry, and did; but if you be rememb'red,
    I did not bid you mar it to the time.
    Go, hop me over every kennel home,
    For you shall hop without my custom, sir.
    I'll none of it; hence! make your best of it.
  KATHERINA. I never saw a better fashion'd gown,
    More quaint, more pleasing, nor more commendable;
    Belike you mean to make a puppet of me.
  PETRUCHIO. Why, true; he means to make a puppet of thee.
  TAILOR. She says your worship means to make a puppet of her.
  PETRUCHIO. O monstrous arrogance! Thou liest, thou thread, thou
      thimble,
    Thou yard, three-quarters, half-yard, quarter, nail,
    Thou flea, thou nit, thou winter-cricket thou-
    Brav'd in mine own house with a skein of thread!
    Away, thou rag, thou quantity, thou remnant;
    Or I shall so bemete thee with thy yard
    As thou shalt think on prating whilst thou liv'st!
    I tell thee, I, that thou hast marr'd her gown.
  TAILOR. Your worship is deceiv'd; the gown is made
    Just as my master had direction.
    Grumio gave order how it should be done.
  GRUMIO. I gave him no order; I gave him the stuff.
  TAILOR. But how did you desire it should be made?
  GRUMIO. Marry, sir, with needle and thread.
  TAILOR. But did you not request to have it cut?
  GRUMIO. Thou hast fac'd many things.
  TAILOR. I have.
  GRUMIO. Face not me. Thou hast brav'd many men; brave not me. I
    will neither be fac'd nor brav'd. I say unto thee, I bid thy
    master cut out the gown; but I did not bid him cut it to pieces.
    Ergo, thou liest.
  TAILOR. Why, here is the note of the fashion to testify.
  PETRUCHIO. Read it.
  GRUMIO. The note lies in's throat, if he say I said so.
  TAILOR.  [Reads]  'Imprimis, a loose-bodied gown'-
  GRUMIO. Master, if ever I said loose-bodied gown, sew me in the
    skirts of it and beat me to death with a bottom of brown bread; I
    said a gown.
  PETRUCHIO. Proceed.
  TAILOR.  [Reads]  'With a small compass'd cape'-
  GRUMIO. I confess the cape.
  TAILOR.  [Reads]  'With a trunk sleeve'-
  GRUMIO. I confess two sleeves.
  TAILOR.  [Reads]  'The sleeves curiously cut.'
  PETRUCHIO. Ay, there's the villainy.
  GRUMIO. Error i' th' bill, sir; error i' th' bill! I commanded the
    sleeves should be cut out, and sew'd up again; and that I'll
    prove upon thee, though thy little finger be armed in a thimble.
  TAILOR. This is true that I say; an I had thee in place where, thou
    shouldst know it.
  GRUMIO. I am for thee straight; take thou the bill, give me thy
    meteyard, and spare not me.
  HORTENSIO. God-a-mercy, Grumio! Then he shall have no odds.
  PETRUCHIO. Well, sir, in brief, the gown is not for me.
  GRUMIO. You are i' th' right, sir; 'tis for my mistress.
  PETRUCHIO. Go, take it up unto thy master's use.
  GRUMIO. Villain, not for thy life! Take up my mistress' gown for
    thy master's use!
  PETRUCHIO. Why, sir, what's your conceit in that?
  GRUMIO. O, sir, the conceit is deeper than you think for.
    Take up my mistress' gown to his master's use!
    O fie, fie, fie!
  PETRUCHIO.  [Aside]  Hortensio, say thou wilt see the tailor paid.-
    Go take it hence; be gone, and say no more.
  HORTENSIO. Tailor, I'll pay thee for thy gown to-morrow;
    Take no unkindness of his hasty words.
    Away, I say; commend me to thy master.           Exit TAILOR
  PETRUCHIO. Well, come, my Kate; we will unto your father's
    Even in these honest mean habiliments;
    Our purses shall be proud, our garments poor;
    For 'tis the mind that makes the body rich;
    And as the sun breaks through the darkest clouds,
    So honour peereth in the meanest habit.
    What, is the jay more precious than the lark
    Because his feathers are more beautiful?
    Or is the adder better than the eel
    Because his painted skin contents the eye?
    O no, good Kate; neither art thou the worse
    For this poor furniture and mean array.
    If thou account'st it shame, lay it on me;
    And therefore frolic; we will hence forthwith
    To feast and sport us at thy father's house.
    Go call my men, and let us straight to him;
    And bring our horses unto Long-lane end;
    There will we mount, and thither walk on foot.
    Let's see; I think 'tis now some seven o'clock,
    And well we may come there by dinner-time.
  KATHERINA. I dare assure you, sir, 'tis almost two,
    And 'twill be supper-time ere you come there.
  PETRUCHIO. It shall be seven ere I go to horse.
    Look what I speak, or do, or think to do,
    You are still crossing it. Sirs, let 't alone;
    I will not go to-day; and ere I do,
    It shall be what o'clock I say it is.
  HORTENSIO. Why, so this gallant will command the sun.
                                                          Exeunt
                             SCENE IV.
                 Padua. Before BAPTISTA'S house

       Enter TRANIO as LUCENTIO, and the PEDANT dressed
                        like VINCENTIO

  TRANIO. Sir, this is the house; please it you that I call?
  PEDANT. Ay, what else? And, but I be deceived,
    Signior Baptista may remember me
    Near twenty years ago in Genoa,
    Where we were lodgers at the Pegasus.
  TRANIO. 'Tis well; and hold your own, in any case,
    With such austerity as longeth to a father.

                       Enter BIONDELLO

  PEDANT. I warrant you. But, sir, here comes your boy;
    'Twere good he were school'd.
  TRANIO. Fear you not him. Sirrah Biondello,
    Now do your duty throughly, I advise you.
    Imagine 'twere the right Vincentio.
  BIONDELLO. Tut, fear not me.
  TRANIO. But hast thou done thy errand to Baptista?
  BIONDELLO. I told him that your father was at Venice,
    And that you look'd for him this day in Padua.
  TRANIO. Th'art a tall fellow; hold thee that to drink.
    Here comes Baptista. Set your countenance, sir.

                 Enter BAPTISTA, and LUCENTIO as CAMBIO

    Signior Baptista, you are happily met.
    [To To the PEDANT] Sir, this is the gentleman I told you of;
    I pray you stand good father to me now;
    Give me Bianca for my patrimony.
  PEDANT. Soft, son!
    Sir, by your leave: having come to Padua
    To gather in some debts, my son Lucentio
    Made me acquainted with a weighty cause
    Of love between your daughter and himself;
    And- for the good report I hear of you,
    And for the love he beareth to your daughter,
    And she to him- to stay him not too long,
    I am content, in a good father's care,
    To have him match'd; and, if you please to like
    No worse than I, upon some agreement
    Me shall you find ready and willing
    With one consent to have her so bestow'd;
    For curious I cannot be with you,
    Signior Baptista, of whom I hear so well.
  BAPTISTA. Sir, pardon me in what I have to say.
    Your plainness and your shortness please me well.
    Right true it is your son Lucentio here
    Doth love my daughter, and she loveth him,
    Or both dissemble deeply their affections;
    And therefore, if you say no more than this,
    That like a father you will deal with him,
    And pass my daughter a sufficient dower,
    The match is made, and all is done-
    Your son shall have my daughter with consent.
  TRANIO. I thank you, sir. Where then do you know best
    We be affied, and such assurance ta'en
    As shall with either part's agreement stand?
  BAPTISTA. Not in my house, Lucentio, for you know
    Pitchers have ears, and I have many servants;
    Besides, old Gremio is heark'ning still,
    And happily we might be interrupted.
  TRANIO. Then at my lodging, an it like you.
    There doth my father lie; and there this night
    We'll pass the business privately and well.
    Send for your daughter by your servant here;
    My boy shall fetch the scrivener presently.
    The worst is this, that at so slender warning
    You are like to have a thin and slender pittance.
  BAPTISTA. It likes me well. Cambio, hie you home,
    And bid Bianca make her ready straight;
    And, if you will, tell what hath happened-
    Lucentio's father is arriv'd in Padua,
    And how she's like to be Lucentio's wife.      Exit LUCENTIO
  BIONDELLO. I pray the gods she may, with all my heart.
  TRANIO. Dally not with the gods, but get thee gone.
                                                  Exit BIONDELLO
    Signior Baptista, shall I lead the way?
    Welcome! One mess is like to be your cheer;
    Come, sir; we will better it in Pisa.
  BAPTISTA. I follow you.                                 Exeunt

            Re-enter LUCENTIO as CAMBIO, and BIONDELLO

  BIONDELLO. Cambio.
  LUCENTIO. What say'st thou, Biondello?
  BIONDELLO. You saw my master wink and laugh upon you?
  LUCENTIO. Biondello, what of that?
  BIONDELLO. Faith, nothing; but has left me here behind to expound
    the meaning or moral of his signs and tokens.
  LUCENTIO. I pray thee moralize them.
  BIONDELLO. Then thus: Baptista is safe, talking with the deceiving
    father of a deceitful son.
  LUCENTIO. And what of him?
  BIONDELLO. His daughter is to be brought by you to the supper.
  LUCENTIO. And then?
  BIONDELLO. The old priest at Saint Luke's church is at your command
    at all hours.
  LUCENTIO. And what of all this?
  BIONDELLO. I cannot tell, except they are busied about a
    counterfeit assurance. Take your assurance of her, cum privilegio
    ad imprimendum solum; to th' church take the priest, clerk, and
    some sufficient honest witnesses.
    If this be not that you look for, I have more to say,
    But bid Bianca farewell for ever and a day.
  LUCENTIO. Hear'st thou, Biondello?
  BIONDELLO. I cannot tarry. I knew a wench married in an afternoon
    as she went to the garden for parsley to stuff a rabbit; and so
    may you, sir; and so adieu, sir. My master hath appointed me to
    go to Saint Luke's to bid the priest be ready to come against you
    come with your appendix.
                                                            Exit
  LUCENTIO. I may and will, if she be so contented.
    She will be pleas'd; then wherefore should I doubt?
    Hap what hap may, I'll roundly go about her;
    It shall go hard if Cambio go without her.              Exit
                             SCENE V.
                          A public road

      Enter PETRUCHIO, KATHERINA, HORTENSIO, and SERVANTS

  PETRUCHIO. Come on, a God's name; once more toward our father's.
    Good Lord, how bright and goodly shines the moon!
  KATHERINA. The moon? The sun! It is not moonlight now.
  PETRUCHIO. I say it is the moon that shines so bright.
  KATHERINA. I know it is the sun that shines so bright.
  PETRUCHIO. Now by my mother's son, and that's myself,
    It shall be moon, or star, or what I list,
    Or ere I journey to your father's house.
    Go on and fetch our horses back again.
    Evermore cross'd and cross'd; nothing but cross'd!
  HORTENSIO. Say as he says, or we shall never go.
  KATHERINA. Forward, I pray, since we have come so far,
    And be it moon, or sun, or what you please;
    And if you please to call it a rush-candle,
    Henceforth I vow it shall be so for me.
  PETRUCHIO. I say it is the moon.
  KATHERINA. I know it is the moon.
  PETRUCHIO. Nay, then you lie; it is the blessed sun.
  KATHERINA. Then, God be bless'd, it is the blessed sun;
    But sun it is not, when you say it is not;
    And the moon changes even as your mind.
    What you will have it nam'd, even that it is,
    And so it shall be so for Katherine.
  HORTENSIO. Petruchio, go thy ways, the field is won.
  PETRUCHIO. Well, forward, forward! thus the bowl should run,
    And not unluckily against the bias.
    But, soft! Company is coming here.

                            Enter VINCENTIO

    [To VINCENTIO]  Good-morrow, gentle mistress; where away?-
    Tell me, sweet Kate, and tell me truly too,
    Hast thou beheld a fresher gentlewoman?
    Such war of white and red within her cheeks!
    What stars do spangle heaven with such beauty
    As those two eyes become that heavenly face?
    Fair lovely maid, once more good day to thee.
    Sweet Kate, embrace her for her beauty's sake.
  HORTENSIO. 'A will make the man mad, to make a woman of him.
  KATHERINA. Young budding virgin, fair and fresh and sweet,
    Whither away, or where is thy abode?
    Happy the parents of so fair a child;
    Happier the man whom favourable stars
    Allots thee for his lovely bed-fellow.
  PETRUCHIO. Why, how now, Kate, I hope thou art not mad!
    This is a man, old, wrinkled, faded, withered,
    And not a maiden, as thou sayst he is.
  KATHERINA. Pardon, old father, my mistaking eyes,
    That have been so bedazzled with the sun
    That everything I look on seemeth green;
    Now I perceive thou art a reverend father.
    Pardon, I pray thee, for my mad mistaking.
  PETRUCHIO. Do, good old grandsire, and withal make known
    Which way thou travellest- if along with us,
    We shall be joyful of thy company.
  VINCENTIO. Fair sir, and you my merry mistress,
    That with your strange encounter much amaz'd me,
    My name is call'd Vincentio, my dwelling Pisa,
    And bound I am to Padua, there to visit
    A son of mine, which long I have not seen.
  PETRUCHIO. What is his name?
  VINCENTIO. Lucentio, gentle sir.
  PETRUCHIO. Happily met; the happier for thy son.
    And now by law, as well as reverend age,
    I may entitle thee my loving father:
    The sister to my wife, this gentlewoman,
    Thy son by this hath married. Wonder not,
    Nor be not grieved- she is of good esteem,
    Her dowry wealthy, and of worthy birth;
    Beside, so qualified as may beseem
    The spouse of any noble gentleman.
    Let me embrace with old Vincentio;
    And wander we to see thy honest son,
    Who will of thy arrival be full joyous.
  VINCENTIO. But is this true; or is it else your pleasure,
    Like pleasant travellers, to break a jest
    Upon the company you overtake?
  HORTENSIO. I do assure thee, father, so it is.
  PETRUCHIO. Come, go along, and see the truth hereof;
    For our first merriment hath made thee jealous.
                                        Exeunt all but HORTENSIO
  HORTENSIO. Well, Petruchio, this has put me in heart.
    Have to my widow; and if she be froward,
    Then hast thou taught Hortensio to be untoward.         Exit
                          ACT V. SCENE I.
                     Padua. Before LUCENTIO'S house

           Enter BIONDELLO, LUCENTIO, and BIANCA; GREMIO
                            is out before

  BIONDELLO. Softly and swiftly, sir, for the priest is ready.
  LUCENTIO. I fly, Biondello; but they may chance to need the at
    home, therefore leave us.
  BIONDELLO. Nay, faith, I'll see the church a your back, and then
    come back to my master's as soon as I can.
                          Exeunt LUCENTIO, BIANCA, and BIONDELLO
  GREMIO. I marvel Cambio comes not all this while.

           Enter PETRUCHIO, KATHERINA, VINCENTIO, GRUMIO,
                          and ATTENDANTS

  PETRUCHIO. Sir, here's the door; this is Lucentio's house;
    My father's bears more toward the market-place;
    Thither must I, and here I leave you, sir.
  VINCENTIO. You shall not choose but drink before you go;
    I think I shall command your welcome here,
    And by all likelihood some cheer is toward.         [Knocks]
  GREMIO. They're busy within; you were best knock louder.
                                [PEDANT looks out of the window]
  PEDANT. What's he that knocks as he would beat down the gate?
  VINCENTIO. Is Signior Lucentio within, sir?
  PEDANT. He's within, sir, but not to be spoken withal.
  VINCENTIO. What if a man bring him a hundred pound or two to make
    merry withal?
  PEDANT. Keep your hundred pounds to yourself; he shall need none so
    long as I live.
  PETRUCHIO. Nay, I told you your son was well beloved in Padua. Do
    you hear, sir? To leave frivolous circumstances, I pray you tell
    Signior Lucentio that his father is come from Pisa, and is here
    at the door to speak with him.
  PEDANT. Thou liest: his father is come from Padua, and here looking
    out at the window.
  VINCENTIO. Art thou his father?
  PEDANT. Ay, sir; so his mother says, if I may believe her.
  PETRUCHIO.  [To VINCENTIO]  Why, how now, gentleman!
    Why, this is flat knavery to take upon you another man's name.
  PEDANT. Lay hands on the villain; I believe 'a means to cozen
    somebody in this city under my countenance.

                       Re-enter BIONDELLO

  BIONDELLO. I have seen them in the church together. God send 'em
    good shipping! But who is here? Mine old master, Vicentio! Now we
    are undone and brought to nothing.
  VINCENTIO.  [Seeing BIONDELLO]  Come hither, crack-hemp.
  BIONDELLO. I hope I may choose, sir.
  VINCENTIO. Come hither, you rogue. What, have you forgot me?
  BIONDELLO. Forgot you! No, sir. I could not forget you, for I never
    saw you before in all my life.
  VINCENTIO. What, you notorious villain, didst thou never see thy
    master's father, Vincentio?
  BIONDELLO. What, my old worshipful old master? Yes, marry, sir; see
    where he looks out of the window.
  VINCENTIO. Is't so, indeed?               [He beats BIONDELLO]
  BIONDELLO. Help, help, help! Here's a madman will murder me.
                                                            Exit
  PEDANT. Help, son! help, Signior Baptista!     Exit from above
  PETRUCHIO. Prithee, Kate, let's stand aside and see the end of this
    controversy.                              [They stand aside]

       Re-enter PEDANT below; BAPTISTA, TRANIO, and SERVANTS

  TRANIO. Sir, what are you that offer to beat my servant?
  VINCENTIO. What am I, sir? Nay, what are you, sir? O immortal gods!
    O fine villain! A silken doublet, a velvet hose, a scarlet cloak,
    and a copatain hat! O, I am undone! I am undone! While I play the
    good husband at home, my son and my servant spend all at the
    university.
  TRANIO. How now! what's the matter?
  BAPTISTA. What, is the man lunatic?
  TRANIO. Sir, you seem a sober ancient gentleman by your habit, but
    your words show you a madman. Why, sir, what 'cerns it you if I
    wear pearl and gold? I thank my good father, I am able to
    maintain it.
  VINCENTIO. Thy father! O villain! he is a sailmaker in Bergamo.
  BAPTISTA. You mistake, sir; you mistake, sir. Pray, what do you
    think is his name?
  VINCENTIO. His name! As if I knew not his name! I have brought him
    up ever since he was three years old, and his name is Tranio.
  PEDANT. Away, away, mad ass! His name is Lucentio; and he is mine
    only son, and heir to the lands of me, Signior Vicentio.
  VINCENTIO. Lucentio! O, he hath murd'red his master! Lay hold on
    him, I charge you, in the Duke's name. O, my son, my son! Tell
    me, thou villain, where is my son, Lucentio?
  TRANIO. Call forth an officer.

                      Enter one with an OFFICER

    Carry this mad knave to the gaol. Father Baptista, I charge you
    see that he be forthcoming.
  VINCENTIO. Carry me to the gaol!
  GREMIO. Stay, Officer; he shall not go to prison.
  BAPTISTA. Talk not, Signior Gremio; I say he shall go to prison.
  GREMIO. Take heed, Signior Baptista, lest you be cony-catch'd in
    this business; I dare swear this is the right Vincentio.
  PEDANT. Swear if thou dar'st.
  GREMIO. Nay, I dare not swear it.
  TRANIO. Then thou wert best say that I am not Lucentio.
  GREMIO. Yes, I know thee to be Signior Lucentio.
  BAPTISTA. Away with the dotard; to the gaol with him!
  VINCENTIO. Thus strangers may be hal'd and abus'd. O monstrous
    villain!

          Re-enter BIONDELLO, with LUCENTIO and BIANCA

  BIONDELLO. O, we are spoil'd; and yonder he is! Deny him, forswear
    him, or else we are all undone.
         Exeunt BIONDELLO, TRANIO, and PEDANT, as fast as may be
  LUCENTIO.  [Kneeling]  Pardon, sweet father.
  VINCENTIO. Lives my sweet son?
  BIANCA. Pardon, dear father.
  BAPTISTA. How hast thou offended?
    Where is Lucentio?
  LUCENTIO. Here's Lucentio,
    Right son to the right Vincentio,
    That have by marriage made thy daughter mine,
    While counterfeit supposes blear'd thine eyne.
  GREMIO. Here's packing, with a witness, to deceive us all!
  VINCENTIO. Where is that damned villain, Tranio,
    That fac'd and brav'd me in this matter so?
  BAPTISTA. Why, tell me, is not this my Cambio?
  BIANCA. Cambio is chang'd into Lucentio.
  LUCENTIO. Love wrought these miracles. Bianca's love
    Made me exchange my state with Tranio,
    While he did bear my countenance in the town;
    And happily I have arrived at the last
    Unto the wished haven of my bliss.
    What Tranio did, myself enforc'd him to;
    Then pardon him, sweet father, for my sake.
  VINCENTIO. I'll slit the villain's nose that would have sent me to
    the gaol.
  BAPTISTA.  [To LUCENTIO]  But do you hear, sir? Have you married my
    daughter without asking my good will?
  VINCENTIO. Fear not, Baptista; we will content you, go to; but I
    will in to be revenged for this villainy.               Exit
  BAPTISTA. And I to sound the depth of this knavery.       Exit
  LUCENTIO. Look not pale, Bianca; thy father will not frown.
                                      Exeunt LUCENTIO and BIANCA
  GREMIO. My cake is dough, but I'll in among the rest;
    Out of hope of all but my share of the feast.           Exit
  KATHERINA. Husband, let's follow to see the end of this ado.
  PETRUCHIO. First kiss me, Kate, and we will.
  KATHERINA. What, in the midst of the street?
  PETRUCHIO. What, art thou asham'd of me?
  KATHERINA. No, sir; God forbid; but asham'd to kiss.
  PETRUCHIO. Why, then, let's home again. Come, sirrah, let's away.
  KATHERINA. Nay, I will give thee a kiss; now pray thee, love, stay.
  PETRUCHIO. Is not this well? Come, my sweet Kate:
    Better once than never, for never too late.           Exeunt
                               SCENE II.
                           LUCENTIO'S house

            Enter BAPTISTA, VINCENTIO, GREMIO, the PEDANT,
          LUCENTIO, BIANCA, PETRUCHIO, KATHERINA, HORTENSIO,
     and WIDOW. The SERVINGMEN with TRANIO, BIONDELLO, and GRUMIO,
                         bringing in a banquet

  LUCENTIO. At last, though long, our jarring notes agree;
    And time it is when raging war is done
    To smile at scapes and perils overblown.
    My fair Bianca, bid my father welcome,
    While I with self-same kindness welcome thine.
    Brother Petruchio, sister Katherina,
    And thou, Hortensio, with thy loving widow,
    Feast with the best, and welcome to my house.
    My banquet is to close our stomachs up
    After our great good cheer. Pray you, sit down;
    For now we sit to chat as well as eat.            [They sit]
  PETRUCHIO. Nothing but sit and sit, and eat and eat!
  BAPTISTA. Padua affords this kindness, son Petruchio.
  PETRUCHIO. Padua affords nothing but what is kind.
  HORTENSIO. For both our sakes I would that word were true.
  PETRUCHIO. Now, for my life, Hortensio fears his widow.
  WIDOW. Then never trust me if I be afeard.
  PETRUCHIO. YOU are very sensible, and yet you miss my sense:
    I mean Hortensio is afeard of you.
  WIDOW. He that is giddy thinks the world turns round.
  PETRUCHIO. Roundly replied.
  KATHERINA. Mistress, how mean you that?
  WIDOW. Thus I conceive by him.
  PETRUCHIO. Conceives by me! How likes Hortensio that?
  HORTENSIO. My widow says thus she conceives her tale.
  PETRUCHIO. Very well mended. Kiss him for that, good widow.
  KATHERINA. 'He that is giddy thinks the world turns round.'
    I pray you tell me what you meant by that.
  WIDOW. Your husband, being troubled with a shrew,
    Measures my husband's sorrow by his woe;
    And now you know my meaning.
  KATHERINA. A very mean meaning.
  WIDOW. Right, I mean you.
  KATHERINA. And I am mean, indeed, respecting you.
  PETRUCHIO. To her, Kate!
  HORTENSIO. To her, widow!
  PETRUCHIO. A hundred marks, my Kate does put her down.
  HORTENSIO. That's my office.
  PETRUCHIO. Spoke like an officer- ha' to thee, lad.
                                           [Drinks to HORTENSIO]
  BAPTISTA. How likes Gremio these quick-witted folks?
  GREMIO. Believe me, sir, they butt together well.
  BIANCA. Head and butt! An hasty-witted body
    Would say your head and butt were head and horn.
  VINCENTIO. Ay, mistress bride, hath that awakened you?
  BIANCA. Ay, but not frighted me; therefore I'll sleep again.
  PETRUCHIO. Nay, that you shall not; since you have begun,
    Have at you for a bitter jest or two.
  BIANCA. Am I your bird? I mean to shift my bush,
    And then pursue me as you draw your bow.
    You are welcome all.
                             Exeunt BIANCA, KATHERINA, and WIDOW
  PETRUCHIO. She hath prevented me. Here, Signior Tranio,
    This bird you aim'd at, though you hit her not;
    Therefore a health to all that shot and miss'd.
  TRANIO. O, sir, Lucentio slipp'd me like his greyhound,
    Which runs himself, and catches for his master.
  PETRUCHIO. A good swift simile, but something currish.
  TRANIO. 'Tis well, sir, that you hunted for yourself;
    'Tis thought your deer does hold you at a bay.
  BAPTISTA. O, O, Petruchio! Tranio hits you now.
  LUCENTIO. I thank thee for that gird, good Tranio.
  HORTENSIO. Confess, confess; hath he not hit you here?
  PETRUCHIO. 'A has a little gall'd me, I confess;
    And, as the jest did glance away from me,
    'Tis ten to one it maim'd you two outright.
  BAPTISTA. Now, in good sadness, son Petruchio,
    I think thou hast the veriest shrew of all.
  PETRUCHIO. Well, I say no; and therefore, for assurance,
    Let's each one send unto his wife,
    And he whose wife is most obedient,
    To come at first when he doth send for her,
    Shall win the wager which we will propose.
  HORTENSIO. Content. What's the wager?
  LUCENTIO. Twenty crowns.
  PETRUCHIO. Twenty crowns?
    I'll venture so much of my hawk or hound,
    But twenty times so much upon my wife.
  LUCENTIO. A hundred then.
  HORTENSIO. Content.
  PETRUCHIO. A match! 'tis done.
  HORTENSIO. Who shall begin?
  LUCENTIO. That will I.
    Go, Biondello, bid your mistress come to me.
  BIONDELLO. I go.                                          Exit
  BAPTISTA. Son, I'll be your half Bianca comes.
  LUCENTIO. I'll have no halves; I'll bear it all myself.

                          Re-enter BIONDELLO

    How now! what news?
  BIONDELLO. Sir, my mistress sends you word
    That she is busy and she cannot come.
  PETRUCHIO. How! She's busy, and she cannot come!
    Is that an answer?
  GREMIO. Ay, and a kind one too.
    Pray God, sir, your wife send you not a worse.
  PETRUCHIO. I hope better.
  HORTENSIO. Sirrah Biondello, go and entreat my wife
    To come to me forthwith.                      Exit BIONDELLO
  PETRUCHIO. O, ho! entreat her!
    Nay, then she must needs come.
  HORTENSIO. I am afraid, sir,
    Do what you can, yours will not be entreated.

                            Re-enter BIONDELLO

    Now, where's my wife?
  BIONDELLO. She says you have some goodly jest in hand:
    She will not come; she bids you come to her.
  PETRUCHIO. Worse and worse; she will not come! O vile,
    Intolerable, not to be endur'd!
    Sirrah Grumio, go to your mistress;
    Say I command her come to me.                    Exit GRUMIO
  HORTENSIO. I know her answer.
  PETRUCHIO. What?
  HORTENSIO. She will not.
  PETRUCHIO. The fouler fortune mine, and there an end.

                             Re-enter KATHERINA

  BAPTISTA. Now, by my holidame, here comes Katherina!
  KATHERINA. What is your sir, that you send for me?
  PETRUCHIO. Where is your sister, and Hortensio's wife?
  KATHERINA. They sit conferring by the parlour fire.
  PETRUCHIO. Go, fetch them hither; if they deny to come.
    Swinge me them soundly forth unto their husbands.
    Away, I say, and bring them hither straight.
                                                  Exit KATHERINA
  LUCENTIO. Here is a wonder, if you talk of a wonder.
  HORTENSIO. And so it is. I wonder what it bodes.
  PETRUCHIO. Marry, peace it bodes, and love, and quiet life,
    An awful rule, and right supremacy;
    And, to be short, what not that's sweet and happy.
  BAPTISTA. Now fair befall thee, good Petruchio!
    The wager thou hast won; and I will ad
    Unto their losses twenty thousand crowns;
    Another dowry to another daughter,
    For she is chang'd, as she had never been.
  PETRUCHIO. Nay, I will win my wager better yet,
    And show more sign of her obedience,
    Her new-built virtue and obedience.

                 Re-enter KATHERINA with BIANCA and WIDOW

    See where she comes, and brings your froward wives
    As prisoners to her womanly persuasion.
    Katherine, that cap of yours becomes you not:
    Off with that bauble, throw it underfoot.
                                            [KATHERINA complies]
  WIDOW. Lord, let me never have a cause to sigh
    Till I be brought to such a silly pass!
  BIANCA. Fie! what a foolish duty call you this?
  LUCENTIO. I would your duty were as foolish too;
    The wisdom of your duty, fair Bianca,
    Hath cost me a hundred crowns since supper-time!
  BIANCA. The more fool you for laying on my duty.
  PETRUCHIO. Katherine, I charge thee, tell these headstrong women
    What duty they do owe their lords and husbands.
  WIDOW. Come, come, you're mocking; we will have no telling.
  PETRUCHIO. Come on, I say; and first begin with her.
  WIDOW. She shall not.
  PETRUCHIO. I say she shall. And first begin with her.
  KATHERINA. Fie, fie! unknit that threatening unkind brow,
    And dart not scornful glances from those eyes
    To wound thy lord, thy king, thy governor.
    It blots thy beauty as frosts do bite the meads,
    Confounds thy fame as whirlwinds shake fair buds,
    And in no sense is meet or amiable.
    A woman mov'd is like a fountain troubled-
    Muddy, ill-seeming, thick, bereft of beauty;
    And while it is so, none so dry or thirsty
    Will deign to sip or touch one drop of it.
    Thy husband is thy lord, thy life, thy keeper,
    Thy head, thy sovereign; one that cares for thee,
    And for thy maintenance commits his body
    To painful labour both by sea and land,
    To watch the night in storms, the day in cold,
    Whilst thou liest warm at home, secure and safe;
    And craves no other tribute at thy hands
    But love, fair looks, and true obedience-
    Too little payment for so great a debt.
    Such duty as the subject owes the prince,
    Even such a woman oweth to her husband;
    And when she is froward, peevish, sullen, sour,
    And not obedient to his honest will,
    What is she but a foul contending rebel
    And graceless traitor to her loving lord?
    I am asham'd that women are so simple
    To offer war where they should kneel for peace;
    Or seek for rule, supremacy, and sway,
    When they are bound to serve, love, and obey.
    Why are our bodies soft and weak and smooth,
    Unapt to toll and trouble in the world,
    But that our soft conditions and our hearts
    Should well agree with our external parts?
    Come, come, you froward and unable worins!
    My mind hath been as big as one of yours,
    My heart as great, my reason haply more,
    To bandy word for word and frown for frown;
    But now I see our lances are but straws,
    Our strength as weak, our weakness past compare,
    That seeming to be most which we indeed least are.
    Then vail your stomachs, for it is no boot,
    And place your hands below your husband's foot;
    In token of which duty, if he please,
    My hand is ready, may it do him ease.
  PETRUCHIO. Why, there's a wench! Come on, and kiss me, Kate.
  LUCENTIO. Well, go thy ways, old lad, for thou shalt ha't.
  VINCENTIO. 'Tis a good hearing when children are toward.
  LUCENTIO. But a harsh hearing when women are froward.
  PETRUCHIO. Come, Kate, we'll to bed.
    We three are married, but you two are sped.
    [To LUCENTIO]  'Twas I won the wager, though you hit the white;
    And being a winner, God give you good night!
                                  Exeunt PETRUCHIO and KATHERINA
  HORTENSIO. Now go thy ways; thou hast tam'd a curst shrow.
  LUCENTIO. 'Tis a wonder, by your leave, she will be tam'd so.
                                                          Exeunt


1594
THE TRAGEDY OF TITUS ANDRONICUS
              Dramatis Personae

  SATURNINUS, son to the late Emperor of Rome, afterwards Emperor
  BASSIANUS, brother to Saturninus
  TITUS ANDRONICUS, a noble Roman
  MARCUS ANDRONICUS, Tribune of the People, and brother to Titus

    Sons to Titus Andronicus:
  LUCIUS
  QUINTUS
  MARTIUS
  MUTIUS

  YOUNG LUCIUS, a boy, son to Lucius
  PUBLIUS, son to Marcus Andronicus

    Kinsmen to Titus:
  SEMPRONIUS
  CAIUS
  VALENTINE

  AEMILIUS, a noble Roman

    Sons to Tamora:
  ALARBUS
  DEMETRIUS
  CHIRON

  AARON, a Moor, beloved by Tamora
  A CAPTAIN
  A MESSENGER
  A CLOWN

  TAMORA, Queen of the Goths
  LAVINIA, daughter to Titus Andronicus
  A NURSE, and a black CHILD
  Romans and Goths, Senators, Tribunes, Officers, Soldiers, and
    Attendants


                          SCENE:
               Rome and the neighbourhood
                        ACT 1. SCENE I.
                   Rome. Before the Capitol

         Flourish. Enter the TRIBUNES and SENATORS aloft;
        and then enter below SATURNINUS and his followers
    at one door, and BASSIANUS and his followers at the other,
                   with drums and trumpets

  SATURNINUS. Noble patricians, patrons of my right,
    Defend the justice of my cause with arms;
    And, countrymen, my loving followers,
    Plead my successive title with your swords.
    I am his first born son that was the last
    That ware the imperial diadem of Rome;
    Then let my father's honours live in me,
    Nor wrong mine age with this indignity.
  BASSIANUS. Romans, friends, followers, favourers of my right,
    If ever Bassianus, Caesar's son,
    Were gracious in the eyes of royal Rome,
    Keep then this passage to the Capitol;
    And suffer not dishonour to approach
    The imperial seat, to virtue consecrate,
    To justice, continence, and nobility;
    But let desert in pure election shine;
    And, Romans, fight for freedom in your choice.

        Enter MARCUS ANDRONICUS aloft, with the crown

  MARCUS. Princes, that strive by factions and by friends
    Ambitiously for rule and empery,
    Know that the people of Rome, for whom we stand
    A special party, have by common voice
    In election for the Roman empery
    Chosen Andronicus, surnamed Pius
    For many good and great deserts to Rome.
    A nobler man, a braver warrior,
    Lives not this day within the city walls.
    He by the Senate is accited home,
    From weary wars against the barbarous Goths,
    That with his sons, a terror to our foes,
    Hath yok'd a nation strong, train'd up in arms.
    Ten years are spent since first he undertook
    This cause of Rome, and chastised with arms
    Our enemies' pride; five times he hath return'd
    Bleeding to Rome, bearing his valiant sons
    In coffins from the field; and at this day
    To the monument of that Andronici
    Done sacrifice of expiation,
    And slain the noblest prisoner of the Goths.
    And now at last, laden with honour's spoils,
    Returns the good Andronicus to Rome,
    Renowned Titus, flourishing in arms.
    Let us entreat, by honour of his name
    Whom worthily you would have now succeed,
    And in the Capitol and Senate's right,
    Whom you pretend to honour and adore,
    That you withdraw you and abate your strength,
    Dismiss your followers, and, as suitors should,
    Plead your deserts in peace and humbleness.
  SATURNINUS. How fair the Tribune speaks to calm my thoughts.
  BASSIANUS. Marcus Andronicus, so I do affy
    In thy uprightness and integrity,
    And so I love and honour thee and thine,
    Thy noble brother Titus and his sons,
    And her to whom my thoughts are humbled all,
    Gracious Lavinia, Rome's rich ornament,
    That I will here dismiss my loving friends,
    And to my fortunes and the people's favour
    Commit my cause in balance to be weigh'd.
                                Exeunt the soldiers of BASSIANUS
  SATURNINUS. Friends, that have been thus forward in my right,
    I thank you all and here dismiss you all,
    And to the love and favour of my country
    Commit myself, my person, and the cause.
                               Exeunt the soldiers of SATURNINUS
    Rome, be as just and gracious unto me
    As I am confident and kind to thee.
    Open the gates and let me in.
  BASSIANUS. Tribunes, and me, a poor competitor.
                    [Flourish. They go up into the Senate House]

                      Enter a CAPTAIN

  CAPTAIN. Romans, make way. The good Andronicus,
    Patron of virtue, Rome's best champion,
    Successful in the battles that he fights,
    With honour and with fortune is return'd
    From where he circumscribed with his sword
    And brought to yoke the enemies of Rome.

        Sound drums and trumpets, and then enter MARTIUS
        and MUTIUS, two of TITUS' sons; and then two men
        bearing a coffin covered with black; then LUCIUS
        and QUINTUS, two other sons; then TITUS ANDRONICUS;
        and then TAMORA the Queen of Goths, with her three
        sons, ALARBUS, DEMETRIUS, and CHIRON, with AARON the
        Moor, and others,  as many as can be. Then set down
        the coffin and TITUS speaks

  TITUS. Hail, Rome, victorious in thy mourning weeds!
    Lo, as the bark that hath discharg'd her fraught
    Returns with precious lading to the bay
    From whence at first she weigh'd her anchorage,
    Cometh Andronicus, bound with laurel boughs,
    To re-salute his country with his tears,
    Tears of true joy for his return to Rome.
    Thou great defender of this Capitol,
    Stand gracious to the rites that we intend!
    Romans, of five and twenty valiant sons,
    Half of the number that King Priam had,
    Behold the poor remains, alive and dead!
    These that survive let Rome reward with love;
    These that I bring unto their latest home,
    With burial amongst their ancestors.
    Here Goths have given me leave to sheathe my sword.
    Titus, unkind, and careless of thine own,
    Why suffer'st thou thy sons, unburied yet,
    To hover on the dreadful shore of Styx?
    Make way to lay them by their brethren.
                                            [They open the tomb]
    There greet in silence, as the dead are wont,
    And sleep in peace, slain in your country's wars.
    O sacred receptacle of my joys,
    Sweet cell of virtue and nobility,
    How many sons hast thou of mine in store
    That thou wilt never render to me more!
  LUCIUS. Give us the proudest prisoner of the Goths,
    That we may hew his limbs, and on a pile
    Ad manes fratrum sacrifice his flesh
    Before this earthy prison of their bones,
    That so the shadows be not unappeas'd,
    Nor we disturb'd with prodigies on earth.
  TITUS. I give him you- the noblest that survives,
    The eldest son of this distressed queen.
  TAMORA. Stay, Roman brethen! Gracious conqueror,
    Victorious Titus, rue the tears I shed,
    A mother's tears in passion for her son;
    And if thy sons were ever dear to thee,
    O, think my son to be as dear to me!
    Sufficeth not that we are brought to Rome
    To beautify thy triumphs, and return
    Captive to thee and to thy Roman yoke;
    But must my sons be slaughtered in the streets
    For valiant doings in their country's cause?
    O, if to fight for king and commonweal
    Were piety in thine, it is in these.
    Andronicus, stain not thy tomb with blood.
    Wilt thou draw near the nature of the gods?
    Draw near them then in being merciful.
    Sweet mercy is nobility's true badge.
    Thrice-noble Titus, spare my first-born son.
  TITUS. Patient yourself, madam, and pardon me.
    These are their brethren, whom your Goths beheld
    Alive and dead; and for their brethren slain
    Religiously they ask a sacrifice.
    To this your son is mark'd, and die he must
    T' appease their groaning shadows that are gone.
  LUCIUS. Away with him, and make a fire straight;
    And with our swords, upon a pile of wood,
    Let's hew his limbs till they be clean consum'd.
                                Exeunt TITUS' SONS, with ALARBUS
  TAMORA. O cruel, irreligious piety!
  CHIRON. Was never Scythia half so barbarous!
  DEMETRIUS. Oppose not Scythia to ambitious Rome.
    Alarbus goes to rest, and we survive
    To tremble under Titus' threat'ning look.
    Then, madam, stand resolv'd, but hope withal
    The self-same gods that arm'd the Queen of Troy
    With opportunity of sharp revenge
    Upon the Thracian tyrant in his tent
    May favour Tamora, the Queen of Goths-
    When Goths were Goths and Tamora was queen-
    To quit the bloody wrongs upon her foes.

            Re-enter LUCIUS, QUINTUS, MARTIUS, and
   MUTIUS, the sons of ANDRONICUS, with their swords bloody

  LUCIUS. See, lord and father, how we have perform'd
    Our Roman rites: Alarbus' limbs are lopp'd,
    And entrails feed the sacrificing fire,
    Whose smoke like incense doth perfume the sky.
    Remaineth nought but to inter our brethren,
    And with loud 'larums welcome them to Rome.
  TITUS. Let it be so, and let Andronicus
    Make this his latest farewell to their souls.
                 [Sound trumpets and lay the coffin in the tomb]
    In peace and honour rest you here, my sons;
    Rome's readiest champions, repose you here in rest,
    Secure from worldly chances and mishaps!
    Here lurks no treason, here no envy swells,
    Here grow no damned drugs, here are no storms,
    No noise, but silence and eternal sleep.
    In peace and honour rest you here, my sons!

                       Enter LAVINIA

  LAVINIA. In peace and honour live Lord Titus long;
    My noble lord and father, live in fame!
    Lo, at this tomb my tributary tears
    I render for my brethren's obsequies;
    And at thy feet I kneel, with tears of joy
    Shed on this earth for thy return to Rome.
    O, bless me here with thy victorious hand,
    Whose fortunes Rome's best citizens applaud!
  TITUS. Kind Rome, that hast thus lovingly reserv'd
    The cordial of mine age to glad my heart!
    Lavinia, live; outlive thy father's days,
    And fame's eternal date, for virtue's praise!

          Enter, above, MARCUS ANDRONICUS and TRIBUNES;
          re-enter SATURNINUS, BASSIANUS, and attendants

  MARCUS. Long live Lord Titus, my beloved brother,
    Gracious triumpher in the eyes of Rome!
  TITUS. Thanks, gentle Tribune, noble brother Marcus.
  MARCUS. And welcome, nephews, from successful wars,
    You that survive and you that sleep in fame.
    Fair lords, your fortunes are alike in all
    That in your country's service drew your swords;
    But safer triumph is this funeral pomp
    That hath aspir'd to Solon's happiness
    And triumphs over chance in honour's bed.
    Titus Andronicus, the people of Rome,
    Whose friend in justice thou hast ever been,
    Send thee by me, their Tribune and their trust,
    This par]iament of white and spotless hue;
    And name thee in election for the empire
    With these our late-deceased Emperor's sons:
    Be candidatus then, and put it on,
    And help to set a head on headless Rome.
  TITUS. A better head her glorious body fits
    Than his that shakes for age and feebleness.
    What should I don this robe and trouble you?
    Be chosen with proclamations to-day,
    To-morrow yield up rule, resign my life,
    And set abroad new business for you all?
    Rome, I have been thy soldier forty years,
    And led my country's strength successfully,
    And buried one and twenty valiant sons,
    Knighted in field, slain manfully in arms,
    In right and service of their noble country.
    Give me a staff of honour for mine age,
    But not a sceptre to control the world.
    Upright he held it, lords, that held it last.
  MARCUS. Titus, thou shalt obtain and ask the empery.
  SATURNINUS. Proud and ambitious Tribune, canst thou tell?
  TITUS. Patience, Prince Saturninus.
  SATURNINUS. Romans, do me right.
    Patricians, draw your swords, and sheathe them not
    Till Saturninus be Rome's Emperor.
    Andronicus, would thou were shipp'd to hell
    Rather than rob me of the people's hearts!
  LUCIUS. Proud Saturnine, interrupter of the good
    That noble-minded Titus means to thee!
  TITUS. Content thee, Prince; I will restore to thee
    The people's hearts, and wean them from themselves.
  BASSIANUS. Andronicus, I do not flatter thee,
    But honour thee, and will do till I die.
    My faction if thou strengthen with thy friends,
    I will most thankful be; and thanks to men
    Of noble minds is honourable meed.
  TITUS. People of Rome, and people's Tribunes here,
    I ask your voices and your suffrages:
    Will ye bestow them friendly on Andronicus?
  TRIBUNES. To gratify the good Andronicus,
    And gratulate his safe return to Rome,
    The people will accept whom he admits.
  TITUS. Tribunes, I thank you; and this suit I make,
    That you create our Emperor's eldest son,
    Lord Saturnine; whose virtues will, I hope,
    Reflect on Rome as Titan's rays on earth,
    And ripen justice in this commonweal.
    Then, if you will elect by my advice,
    Crown him, and say 'Long live our Emperor!'
  MARCUS. With voices and applause of every sort,
    Patricians and plebeians, we create
    Lord Saturninus Rome's great Emperor;
    And say 'Long live our Emperor Saturnine!'
                           [A long flourish till they come down]
  SATURNINUS. Titus Andronicus, for thy favours done
    To us in our election this day
    I give thee thanks in part of thy deserts,
    And will with deeds requite thy gentleness;
    And for an onset, Titus, to advance
    Thy name and honourable family,
    Lavinia will I make my emperess,
    Rome's royal mistress, mistress of my heart,
    And in the sacred Pantheon her espouse.
    Tell me, Andronicus, doth this motion please thee?
  TITUS. It doth, my worthy lord, and in this match
    I hold me highly honoured of your Grace,
    And here in sight of Rome, to Saturnine,
    King and commander of our commonweal,
    The wide world's Emperor, do I consecrate
    My sword, my chariot, and my prisoners,
    Presents well worthy Rome's imperious lord;
    Receive them then, the tribute that I owe,
    Mine honour's ensigns humbled at thy feet.
  SATURNINUS. Thanks, noble Titus, father of my life.
    How proud I am of thee and of thy gifts
    Rome shall record; and when I do forget
    The least of these unspeakable deserts,
    Romans, forget your fealty to me.
  TITUS.  [To TAMORA]  Now, madam, are you prisoner to an emperor;
    To him that for your honour and your state
    Will use you nobly and your followers.
  SATURNINUS.  [Aside]  A goodly lady, trust me; of the hue
    That I would choose, were I to choose anew.-
    Clear up, fair Queen, that cloudy countenance;
    Though chance of war hath wrought this change of cheer,
    Thou com'st not to be made a scorn in Rome-
    Princely shall be thy usage every way.
    Rest on my word, and let not discontent
    Daunt all your hopes. Madam, he comforts you
    Can make you greater than the Queen of Goths.
    Lavinia, you are not displeas'd with this?
  LAVINIA. Not I, my lord, sith true nobility
    Warrants these words in princely courtesy.
  SATURNINUS. Thanks, sweet Lavinia. Romans, let us go.
    Ransomless here we set our prisoners free.
    Proclaim our honours, lords, with trump and drum.
                                                      [Flourish]
  BASSIANUS. Lord Titus, by your leave, this maid is mine.
                                               [Seizing LAVINIA]
  TITUS. How, sir! Are you in earnest then, my lord?
  BASSIANUS. Ay, noble Titus, and resolv'd withal
    To do myself this reason and this right.
  MARCUS. Suum cuique is our Roman justice:
    This prince in justice seizeth but his own.
  LUCIUS. And that he will and shall, if Lucius live.
  TITUS. Traitors, avaunt! Where is the Emperor's guard?
    Treason, my lord- Lavinia is surpris'd!
  SATURNINUS. Surpris'd! By whom?
  BASSIANUS. By him that justly may
    Bear his betroth'd from all the world away.
                        Exeunt BASSIANUS and MARCUS with LAVINIA
  MUTIUS. Brothers, help to convey her hence away,
    And with my sword I'll keep this door safe.
                             Exeunt LUCIUS, QUINTUS, and MARTIUS
  TITUS. Follow, my lord, and I'll soon bring her back.
  MUTIUS. My lord, you pass not here.
  TITUS. What, villain boy!
    Bar'st me my way in Rome?
  MUTIUS. Help, Lucius, help!
            TITUS kills him. During the fray, exeunt SATURNINUS,
                            TAMORA, DEMETRIUS, CHIRON, and AARON

                      Re-enter Lucius

  LUCIUS. My lord, you are unjust, and more than so:
    In wrongful quarrel you have slain your son.
  TITUS. Nor thou nor he are any sons of mine;
    My sons would never so dishonour me.

                 Re-enter aloft the EMPEROR
      with TAMORA and her two Sons, and AARON the Moor

    Traitor, restore Lavinia to the Emperor.
  LUCIUS. Dead, if you will; but not to be his wife,
    That is another's lawful promis'd love.                 Exit
  SATURNINUS. No, Titus, no; the Emperor needs her not,
    Nor her, nor thee, nor any of thy stock.
    I'll trust by leisure him that mocks me once;
    Thee never, nor thy traitorous haughty sons,
    Confederates all thus to dishonour me.
    Was there none else in Rome to make a stale
    But Saturnine? Full well, Andronicus,
    Agree these deeds with that proud brag of thine
    That saidst I begg'd the empire at thy hands.
  TITUS. O monstrous! What reproachful words are these?
  SATURNINUS. But go thy ways; go, give that changing piece
    To him that flourish'd for her with his sword.
    A valiant son-in-law thou shalt enjoy;
    One fit to bandy with thy lawless sons,
    To ruffle in the commonwealth of Rome.
  TITUS. These words are razors to my wounded heart.
  SATURNINUS. And therefore, lovely Tamora, Queen of Goths,
    That, like the stately Phoebe 'mongst her nymphs,
    Dost overshine the gallant'st dames of Rome,
    If thou be pleas'd with this my sudden choice,
    Behold, I choose thee, Tamora, for my bride
    And will create thee Emperess of Rome.
    Speak, Queen of Goths, dost thou applaud my choice?
    And here I swear by all the Roman gods-
    Sith priest and holy water are so near,
    And tapers burn so bright, and everything
    In readiness for Hymenaeus stand-
    I will not re-salute the streets of Rome,
    Or climb my palace, till from forth this place
    I lead espous'd my bride along with me.
  TAMORA. And here in sight of heaven to Rome I swear,
    If Saturnine advance the Queen of Goths,
    She will a handmaid be to his desires,
    A loving nurse, a mother to his youth.
  SATURNINUS. Ascend, fair Queen, Pantheon. Lords, accompany
    Your noble Emperor and his lovely bride,
    Sent by the heavens for Prince Saturnine,
    Whose wisdom hath her fortune conquered;
    There shall we consummate our spousal rites.
                                            Exeunt all but TITUS
  TITUS. I am not bid to wait upon this bride.
  TITUS, when wert thou wont to walk alone,
    Dishonoured thus, and challenged of wrongs?

                      Re-enter MARCUS,
        and TITUS' SONS, LUCIUS, QUINTUS, and MARTIUS

  MARCUS. O Titus, see, O, see what thou hast done!
    In a bad quarrel slain a virtuous son.
  TITUS. No, foolish Tribune, no; no son of mine-
    Nor thou, nor these, confederates in the deed
    That hath dishonoured all our family;
    Unworthy brother and unworthy sons!
  LUCIUS. But let us give him burial, as becomes;
    Give Mutius burial with our bretheren.
  TITUS. Traitors, away! He rests not in this tomb.
    This monument five hundred years hath stood,
    Which I have sumptuously re-edified;
    Here none but soldiers and Rome's servitors
    Repose in fame; none basely slain in brawls.
    Bury him where you can, he comes not here.
  MARCUS. My lord, this is impiety in you.
    My nephew Mutius' deeds do plead for him;
    He must be buried with his bretheren.
  QUINTUS & MARTIUS. And shall, or him we will accompany.
  TITUS. 'And shall!' What villain was it spake that word?
  QUINTUS. He that would vouch it in any place but here.
  TITUS. What, would you bury him in my despite?
  MARCUS. No, noble Titus, but entreat of thee
    To pardon Mutius and to bury him.
  TITUS. Marcus, even thou hast struck upon my crest,
    And with these boys mine honour thou hast wounded.
    My foes I do repute you every one;
    So trouble me no more, but get you gone.
  MARTIUS. He is not with himself; let us withdraw.
  QUINTUS. Not I, till Mutius' bones be buried.
                                [The BROTHER and the SONS kneel]
  MARCUS. Brother, for in that name doth nature plead-
  QUINTUS. Father, and in that name doth nature speak-
  TITUS. Speak thou no more, if all the rest will speed.
  MARCUS. Renowned Titus, more than half my soul-
  LUCIUS. Dear father, soul and substance of us all-
  MARCUS. Suffer thy brother Marcus to inter
    His noble nephew here in virtue's nest,
    That died in honour and Lavinia's cause.
    Thou art a Roman- be not barbarous.
    The Greeks upon advice did bury Ajax,
    That slew himself; and wise Laertes' son
    Did graciously plead for his funerals.
    Let not young Mutius, then, that was thy joy,
    Be barr'd his entrance here.
  TITUS. Rise, Marcus, rise;
    The dismal'st day is this that e'er I saw,
    To be dishonoured by my sons in Rome!
    Well, bury him, and bury me the next.
                                   [They put MUTIUS in the tomb]
  LUCIUS. There lie thy bones, sweet Mutius, with thy friends,
    Till we with trophies do adorn thy tomb.
  ALL.  [Kneeling]  No man shed tears for noble Mutius;
    He lives in fame that died in virtue's cause.
  MARCUS. My lord- to step out of these dreary dumps-
    How comes it that the subtle Queen of Goths
    Is of a sudden thus advanc'd in Rome?
  TITUS. I know not, Marcus, but I know it is-
    Whether by device or no, the heavens can tell.
    Is she not, then, beholding to the man
    That brought her for this high good turn so far?
  MARCUS. Yes, and will nobly him remunerate.
           Flourish. Re-enter the EMPEROR, TAMORA
        and her two SONS, with the MOOR, at one door;
    at the other door, BASSIANUS and LAVINIA, with others

  SATURNINUS. So, Bassianus, you have play'd your prize:
    God give you joy, sir, of your gallant bride!
  BASSIANUS. And you of yours, my lord! I say no more,
    Nor wish no less; and so I take my leave.
  SATURNINUS. Traitor, if Rome have law or we have power,
    Thou and thy faction shall repent this rape.
  BASSIANUS. Rape, call you it, my lord, to seize my own,
    My true betrothed love, and now my wife?
    But let the laws of Rome determine all;
    Meanwhile am I possess'd of that is mine.
  SATURNINUS. 'Tis good, sir. You are very short with us;
    But if we live we'll be as sharp with you.
  BASSIANUS. My lord, what I have done, as best I may,
    Answer I must, and shall do with my life.
    Only thus much I give your Grace to know:
    By all the duties that I owe to Rome,
    This noble gentleman, Lord Titus here,
    Is in opinion and in honour wrong'd,
    That, in the rescue of Lavinia,
    With his own hand did slay his youngest son,
    In zeal to you, and highly mov'd to wrath
    To be controll'd in that he frankly gave.
    Receive him then to favour, Saturnine,
    That hath express'd himself in all his deeds
    A father and a friend to thee and Rome.
  TITUS. Prince Bassianus, leave to plead my deeds.
    'Tis thou and those that have dishonoured me.
    Rome and the righteous heavens be my judge
    How I have lov'd and honoured Saturnine!
  TAMORA. My worthy lord, if ever Tamora
    Were gracious in those princely eyes of thine,
    Then hear me speak indifferently for all;
    And at my suit, sweet, pardon what is past.
  SATURNINUS. What, madam! be dishonoured openly,
    And basely put it up without revenge?
  TAMORA. Not so, my lord; the gods of Rome forfend
    I should be author to dishonour you!
    But on mine honour dare I undertake
    For good Lord Titus' innocence in all,
    Whose fury not dissembled speaks his griefs.
    Then at my suit look graciously on him;
    Lose not so noble a friend on vain suppose,
    Nor with sour looks afflict his gentle heart.
    [Aside to SATURNINUS]  My lord, be rul'd by me,
      be won at last;
    Dissemble all your griefs and discontents.
    You are but newly planted in your throne;
    Lest, then, the people, and patricians too,
    Upon a just survey take Titus' part,
    And so supplant you for ingratitude,
    Which Rome reputes to be a heinous sin,
    Yield at entreats, and then let me alone:
    I'll find a day to massacre them all,
    And raze their faction and their family,
    The cruel father and his traitorous sons,
    To whom I sued for my dear son's life;
    And make them know what 'tis to let a queen
    Kneel in the streets and beg for grace in vain.-
    Come, come, sweet Emperor; come, Andronicus.
    Take up this good old man, and cheer the heart
    That dies in tempest of thy angry frown.
  SATURNINUS. Rise, Titus, rise; my Empress hath prevail'd.
  TITUS. I thank your Majesty and her, my lord;
    These words, these looks, infuse new life in me.
  TAMORA. Titus, I am incorporate in Rome,
    A Roman now adopted happily,
    And must advise the Emperor for his good.
    This day all quarrels die, Andronicus;
    And let it be mine honour, good my lord,
    That I have reconcil'd your friends and you.
    For you, Prince Bassianus, I have pass'd
    My word and promise to the Emperor
    That you will be more mild and tractable.
    And fear not, lords- and you, Lavinia.
    By my advice, all humbled on your knees,
    You shall ask pardon of his Majesty.
  LUCIUS. We do, and vow to heaven and to his Highness
    That what we did was mildly as we might,
    Tend'ring our sister's honour and our own.
  MARCUS. That on mine honour here do I protest.
  SATURNINUS. Away, and talk not; trouble us no more.
  TAMORA. Nay, nay, sweet Emperor, we must all be friends.
    The Tribune and his nephews kneel for grace.
    I will not be denied. Sweet heart, look back.
  SATURNINUS. Marcus, for thy sake, and thy brother's here,
    And at my lovely Tamora's entreats,
    I do remit these young men's heinous faults.
    Stand up.
    Lavinia, though you left me like a churl,
    I found a friend; and sure as death I swore
    I would not part a bachelor from the priest.
    Come, if the Emperor's court can feast two brides,
    You are my guest, Lavinia, and your friends.
    This day shall be a love-day, Tamora.
  TITUS. To-morrow, and it please your Majesty
    To hunt the panther and the hart with me,
    With horn and hound we'll give your Grace bonjour.
  SATURNINUS. Be it so, Titus, and gramercy too.
                                          Exeunt. Sound trumpets
                      ACT II. SCENE I.
                  Rome. Before the palace

                        Enter AARON

  AARON. Now climbeth Tamora Olympus' top,
    Safe out of Fortune's shot, and sits aloft,
    Secure of thunder's crack or lightning flash,
    Advanc'd above pale envy's threat'ning reach.
    As when the golden sun salutes the morn,
    And, having gilt the ocean with his beams,
    Gallops the zodiac in his glistening coach
    And overlooks the highest-peering hills,
    So Tamora.
    Upon her wit doth earthly honour wait,
    And virtue stoops and trembles at her frown.
    Then, Aaron, arm thy heart and fit thy thoughts
    To mount aloft with thy imperial mistress,
    And mount her pitch whom thou in triumph long.
    Hast prisoner held, fett'red in amorous chains,
    And faster bound to Aaron's charming eyes
    Than is Prometheus tied to Caucasus.
    Away with slavish weeds and servile thoughts!
    I will be bright and shine in pearl and gold,
    To wait upon this new-made emperess.
    To wait, said I? To wanton with this queen,
    This goddess, this Semiramis, this nymph,
    This siren that will charm Rome's Saturnine,
    And see his shipwreck and his commonweal's.
    Hullo! what storm is this?

            Enter CHIRON and DEMETRIUS, braving

  DEMETRIUS. Chiron, thy years wants wit, thy wits wants edge
    And manners, to intrude where I am grac'd,
    And may, for aught thou knowest, affected be.
  CHIRON. Demetrius, thou dost over-ween in all;
    And so in this, to bear me down with braves.
    'Tis not the difference of a year or two
    Makes me less gracious or thee more fortunate:
    I am as able and as fit as thou
    To serve and to deserve my mistress' grace;
    And that my sword upon thee shall approve,
    And plead my passions for Lavinia's love.
  AARON.  [Aside]  Clubs, clubs! These lovers will not keep the
    peace.
  DEMETRIUS. Why, boy, although our mother, unadvis'd,
    Gave you a dancing rapier by your side,
    Are you so desperate grown to threat your friends?
    Go to; have your lath glued within your sheath
    Till you know better how to handle it.
  CHIRON. Meanwhile, sir, with the little skill I have,
    Full well shalt thou perceive how much I dare.
  DEMETRIUS. Ay, boy, grow ye so brave?              [They draw]
  AARON.  [Coming forward]  Why, how now, lords!
    So near the Emperor's palace dare ye draw
    And maintain such a quarrel openly?
    Full well I wot the ground of all this grudge:
    I would not for a million of gold
    The cause were known to them it most concerns;
    Nor would your noble mother for much more
    Be so dishonoured in the court of Rome.
    For shame, put up.
  DEMETRIUS. Not I, till I have sheath'd
    My rapier in his bosom, and withal
    Thrust those reproachful speeches down his throat
    That he hath breath'd in my dishonour here.
  CHIRON. For that I am prepar'd and full resolv'd,
    Foul-spoken coward, that thund'rest with thy tongue,
    And with thy weapon nothing dar'st perform.
  AARON. Away, I say!
    Now, by the gods that warlike Goths adore,
    This pretty brabble will undo us all.
    Why, lords, and think you not how dangerous
    It is to jet upon a prince's right?
    What, is Lavinia then become so loose,
    Or Bassianus so degenerate,
    That for her love such quarrels may be broach'd
    Without controlment, justice, or revenge?
    Young lords, beware; an should the Empress know
    This discord's ground, the music would not please.
  CHIRON. I care not, I, knew she and all the world:
    I love Lavinia more than all the world.
  DEMETRIUS. Youngling, learn thou to make some meaner choice:
    Lavina is thine elder brother's hope.
  AARON. Why, are ye mad, or know ye not in Rome
    How furious and impatient they be,
    And cannot brook competitors in love?
    I tell you, lords, you do but plot your deaths
    By this device.
  CHIRON. Aaron, a thousand deaths
    Would I propose to achieve her whom I love.
  AARON. To achieve her- how?
  DEMETRIUS. Why mak'st thou it so strange?
    She is a woman, therefore may be woo'd;
    She is a woman, therefore may be won;
    She is Lavinia, therefore must be lov'd.
    What, man! more water glideth by the mill
    Than wots the miller of; and easy it is
    Of a cut loaf to steal a shive, we know.
    Though Bassianus be the Emperor's brother,
    Better than he have worn Vulcan's badge.
  AARON.  [Aside]  Ay, and as good as Saturninus may.
  DEMETRIUS. Then why should he despair that knows to court it
    With words, fair looks, and liberality?
    What, hast not thou full often struck a doe,
    And borne her cleanly by the keeper's nose?
  AARON. Why, then, it seems some certain snatch or so
    Would serve your turns.
  CHIRON. Ay, so the turn were served.
  DEMETRIUS. Aaron, thou hast hit it.
  AARON. Would you had hit it too!
    Then should not we be tir'd with this ado.
    Why, hark ye, hark ye! and are you such fools
    To square for this? Would it offend you, then,
    That both should speed?
  CHIRON. Faith, not me.
  DEMETRIUS. Nor me, so I were one.
  AARON. For shame, be friends, and join for that you jar.
    'Tis policy and stratagem must do
    That you affect; and so must you resolve
    That what you cannot as you would achieve,
    You must perforce accomplish as you may.
    Take this of me: Lucrece was not more chaste
    Than this Lavinia, Bassianus' love.
    A speedier course than ling'ring languishment
    Must we pursue, and I have found the path.
    My lords, a solemn hunting is in hand;
    There will the lovely Roman ladies troop;
    The forest walks are wide and spacious,
    And many unfrequented plots there are
    Fitted by kind for rape and villainy.
    Single you thither then this dainty doe,
    And strike her home by force if not by words.
    This way, or not at all, stand you in hope.
    Come, come, our Empress, with her sacred wit
    To villainy and vengeance consecrate,
    Will we acquaint with all what we intend;
    And she shall file our engines with advice
    That will not suffer you to square yourselves,
    But to your wishes' height advance you both.
    The Emperor's court is like the house of Fame,
    The palace full of tongues, of eyes, and ears;
    The woods are ruthless, dreadful, deaf, and dull.
    There speak and strike, brave boys, and take your turns;
    There serve your lust, shadowed from heaven's eye,
    And revel in Lavinia's treasury.
  CHIRON. Thy counsel, lad, smells of no cowardice.
  DEMETRIUS. Sit fas aut nefas, till I find the stream
    To cool this heat, a charm to calm these fits,
    Per Styga, per manes vehor.                           Exeunt
                          SCENE II.
                     A forest near Rome

                 Enter TITUS ANDRONICUS, and
          his three sons, LUCIUS, QUINTUS, MARTIUS,
      making a noise with hounds and horns; and MARCUS

  TITUS. The hunt is up, the morn is bright and grey,
    The fields are fragrant, and the woods are green.
    Uncouple here, and let us make a bay,
    And wake the Emperor and his lovely bride,
    And rouse the Prince, and ring a hunter's peal,
    That all the court may echo with the noise.
    Sons, let it be your charge, as it is ours,
    To attend the Emperor's person carefully.
    I have been troubled in my sleep this night,
    But dawning day new comfort hath inspir'd.

         Here a cry of hounds, and wind horns in a peal.
       Then enter SATURNINUS, TAMORA, BASSIANUS LAVINIA,
            CHIRON, DEMETRIUS, and their attendants

    Many good morrows to your Majesty!
    Madam, to you as many and as good!
    I promised your Grace a hunter's peal.
  SATURNINUS. And you have rung it lustily, my lords-
    Somewhat too early for new-married ladies.
  BASSIANUS. Lavinia, how say you?
  LAVINIA. I say no;
    I have been broad awake two hours and more.
  SATURNINUS. Come on then, horse and chariots let us have,
    And to our sport.  [To TAMORA]  Madam, now shall ye see
    Our Roman hunting.
  MARCUS. I have dogs, my lord,
    Will rouse the proudest panther in the chase,
    And climb the highest promontory top.
  TITUS. And I have horse will follow where the game
    Makes way, and run like swallows o'er the plain.
  DEMETRIUS. Chiron, we hunt not, we, with horse nor hound,
    But hope to pluck a dainty doe to ground.             Exeunt
                         SCENE III.
                  A lonely part of the forest

             Enter AARON alone, with a bag of gold

  AARON. He that had wit would think that I had none,
    To bury so much gold under a tree
    And never after to inherit it.
    Let him that thinks of me so abjectly
    Know that this gold must coin a stratagem,
    Which, cunningly effected, will beget
    A very excellent piece of villainy.
    And so repose, sweet gold, for their unrest
                                                [Hides the gold]
    That have their alms out of the Empress' chest.

               Enter TAMORA alone, to the Moor

  TAMORA. My lovely Aaron, wherefore look'st thou sad
    When everything does make a gleeful boast?
    The birds chant melody on every bush;
    The snakes lie rolled in the cheerful sun;
    The green leaves quiver with the cooling wind
    And make a chequer'd shadow on the ground;
    Under their sweet shade, Aaron, let us sit,
    And while the babbling echo mocks the hounds,
    Replying shrilly to the well-tun'd horns,
    As if a double hunt were heard at once,
    Let us sit down and mark their yellowing noise;
    And- after conflict such as was suppos'd
    The wand'ring prince and Dido once enjoyed,
    When with a happy storm they were surpris'd,
    And curtain'd with a counsel-keeping cave-
    We may, each wreathed in the other's arms,
    Our pastimes done, possess a golden slumber,
    Whiles hounds and horns and sweet melodious birds
    Be unto us as is a nurse's song
    Of lullaby to bring her babe asleep.
  AARON. Madam, though Venus govern your desires,
    Saturn is dominator over mine.
    What signifies my deadly-standing eye,
    My silence and my cloudy melancholy,
    My fleece of woolly hair that now uncurls
    Even as an adder when she doth unroll
    To do some fatal execution?
    No, madam, these are no venereal signs.
    Vengeance is in my heart, death in my hand,
    Blood and revenge are hammering in my head.
    Hark, Tamora, the empress of my soul,
    Which never hopes more heaven than rests in thee-
    This is the day of doom for Bassianus;
    His Philomel must lose her tongue to-day,
    Thy sons make pillage of her chastity,
    And wash their hands in Bassianus' blood.
    Seest thou this letter? Take it up, I pray thee,
    And give the King this fatal-plotted scroll.
    Now question me no more; we are espied.
    Here comes a parcel of our hopeful booty,
    Which dreads not yet their lives' destruction.

                Enter BASSIANUS and LAVINIA

  TAMORA. Ah, my sweet Moor, sweeter to me than life!
  AARON. No more, great Empress: Bassianus comes.
    Be cross with him; and I'll go fetch thy sons
    To back thy quarrels, whatsoe'er they be.               Exit
  BASSIANUS. Who have we here? Rome's royal Emperess,
    Unfurnish'd of her well-beseeming troop?
    Or is it Dian, habited like her,
    Who hath abandoned her holy groves
    To see the general hunting in this forest?
  TAMORA. Saucy controller of my private steps!
    Had I the pow'r that some say Dian had,
    Thy temples should be planted presently
    With horns, as was Actaeon's; and the hounds
    Should drive upon thy new-transformed limbs,
    Unmannerly intruder as thou art!
  LAVINIA. Under your patience, gentle Emperess,
    'Tis thought you have a goodly gift in horning,
    And to be doubted that your Moor and you
    Are singled forth to try thy experiments.
    Jove shield your husband from his hounds to-day!
    'Tis pity they should take him for a stag.
  BASSIANUS. Believe me, Queen, your swarth Cimmerian
    Doth make your honour of his body's hue,
    Spotted, detested, and abominable.
    Why are you sequest'red from all your train,
    Dismounted from your snow-white goodly steed,
    And wand'red hither to an obscure plot,
    Accompanied but with a barbarous Moor,
    If foul desire had not conducted you?
  LAVINIA. And, being intercepted in your sport,
    Great reason that my noble lord be rated
    For sauciness. I pray you let us hence,
    And let her joy her raven-coloured love;
    This valley fits the purpose passing well.
  BASSIANUS. The King my brother shall have notice of this.
  LAVINIA. Ay, for these slips have made him noted long.
    Good king, to be so mightily abused!
  TAMORA. Why, I have patience to endure all this.

                  Enter CHIRON and DEMETRIUS

  DEMETRIUS. How now, dear sovereign, and our gracious mother!
    Why doth your Highness look so pale and wan?
  TAMORA. Have I not reason, think you, to look pale?
    These two have 'ticed me hither to this place.
    A barren detested vale you see it is:
    The trees, though summer, yet forlorn and lean,
    Overcome with moss and baleful mistletoe;
    Here never shines the sun; here nothing breeds,
    Unless the nightly owl or fatal raven.
    And when they show'd me this abhorred pit,
    They told me, here, at dead time of the night,
    A thousand fiends, a thousand hissing snakes,
    Ten thousand swelling toads, as many urchins,
    Would make such fearful and confused cries
    As any mortal body hearing it
    Should straight fall mad or else die suddenly.
    No sooner had they told this hellish tale
    But straight they told me they would bind me here
    Unto the body of a dismal yew,
    And leave me to this miserable death.
    And then they call'd me foul adulteress,
    Lascivious Goth, and all the bitterest terms
    That ever ear did hear to such effect;
    And had you not by wondrous fortune come,
    This vengeance on me had they executed.
    Revenge it, as you love your mother's life,
    Or be ye not henceforth call'd my children.
  DEMETRIUS. This is a witness that I am thy son.
                                               [Stabs BASSIANUS]
  CHIRON. And this for me, struck home to show my strength.
                                                    [Also stabs]
  LAVINIA. Ay, come, Semiramis- nay, barbarous Tamora,
    For no name fits thy nature but thy own!
  TAMORA. Give me the poniard; you shall know, my boys,
    Your mother's hand shall right your mother's wrong.
  DEMETRIUS. Stay, madam, here is more belongs to her;
    First thrash the corn, then after burn the straw.
    This minion stood upon her chastity,
    Upon her nuptial vow, her loyalty,
    And with that painted hope braves your mightiness;
    And shall she carry this unto her grave?
  CHIRON. An if she do, I would I were an eunuch.
    Drag hence her husband to some secret hole,
    And make his dead trunk pillow to our lust.
  TAMORA. But when ye have the honey we desire,
    Let not this wasp outlive, us both to sting.
  CHIRON. I warrant you, madam, we will make that sure.
    Come, mistress, now perforce we will enjoy
    That nice-preserved honesty of yours.
  LAVINIA. O Tamora! thou bearest a woman's face-
  TAMORA. I will not hear her speak; away with her!
  LAVINIA. Sweet lords, entreat her hear me but a word.
  DEMETRIUS. Listen, fair madam: let it be your glory
    To see her tears; but be your heart to them
    As unrelenting flint to drops of rain.
  LAVINIA. When did the tiger's young ones teach the dam?
    O, do not learn her wrath- she taught it thee;
    The milk thou suck'dst from her did turn to marble,
    Even at thy teat thou hadst thy tyranny.
    Yet every mother breeds not sons alike:
    [To CHIRON]  Do thou entreat her show a woman's pity.
  CHIRON. What, wouldst thou have me prove myself a bastard?
  LAVINIA. 'Tis true, the raven doth not hatch a lark.
    Yet have I heard- O, could I find it now!-
    The lion, mov'd with pity, did endure
    To have his princely paws par'd all away.
    Some say that ravens foster forlorn children,
    The whilst their own birds famish in their nests;
    O, be to me, though thy hard heart say no,
    Nothing so kind, but something pitiful!
  TAMORA. I know not what it means; away with her!
  LAVINIA. O, let me teach thee! For my father's sake,
    That gave thee life when well he might have slain thee,
    Be not obdurate, open thy deaf ears.
  TAMORA. Hadst thou in person ne'er offended me,
    Even for his sake am I pitiless.
    Remember, boys, I pour'd forth tears in vain
    To save your brother from the sacrifice;
    But fierce Andronicus would not relent.
    Therefore away with her, and use her as you will;
    The worse to her the better lov'd of me.
  LAVINIA. O Tamora, be call'd a gentle queen,
    And with thine own hands kill me in this place!
    For 'tis not life that I have begg'd so long;
    Poor I was slain when Bassianus died.
  TAMORA. What beg'st thou, then? Fond woman, let me go.
  LAVINIA. 'Tis present death I beg; and one thing more,
    That womanhood denies my tongue to tell:
    O, keep me from their worse than killing lust,
    And tumble me into some loathsome pit,
    Where never man's eye may behold my body;
    Do this, and be a charitable murderer.
  TAMORA. So should I rob my sweet sons of their fee;
    No, let them satisfy their lust on thee.
  DEMETRIUS. Away! for thou hast stay'd us here too long.
  LAVINIA. No grace? no womanhood? Ah, beastly creature,
    The blot and enemy to our general name!
    Confusion fall-
  CHIRON. Nay, then I'll stop your mouth. Bring thou her husband.
    This is the hole where Aaron bid us hide him.

                 DEMETRIUS throws the body
           of BASSIANUS into the pit; then exeunt
         DEMETRIUS and CHIRON, dragging off LAVINIA

  TAMORA. Farewell, my sons; see that you make her sure.
    Ne'er let my heart know merry cheer indeed
    Till all the Andronici be made away.
    Now will I hence to seek my lovely Moor,
    And let my spleenful sons this trull deflower.          Exit

                  Re-enter AARON, with two
             of TITUS' sons, QUINTUS and MARTIUS

  AARON. Come on, my lords, the better foot before;
    Straight will I bring you to the loathsome pit
    Where I espied the panther fast asleep.
  QUINTUS. My sight is very dull, whate'er it bodes.
  MARTIUS. And mine, I promise you; were it not for shame,
    Well could I leave our sport to sleep awhile.
                                            [Falls into the pit]
  QUINTUS. What, art thou fallen? What subtle hole is this,
    Whose mouth is covered with rude-growing briers,
    Upon whose leaves are drops of new-shed blood
    As fresh as morning dew distill'd on flowers?
    A very fatal place it seems to me.
    Speak, brother, hast thou hurt thee with the fall?
  MARTIUS. O brother, with the dismal'st object hurt
    That ever eye with sight made heart lament!
  AARON.  [Aside]  Now will I fetch the King to find them here,
    That he thereby may have a likely guess
    How these were they that made away his brother.         Exit
  MARTIUS. Why dost not comfort me, and help me out
    From this unhallow'd and blood-stained hole?
  QUINTUS. I am surprised with an uncouth fear;
    A chilling sweat o'er-runs my trembling joints;
    My heart suspects more than mine eye can see.
  MARTIUS. To prove thou hast a true divining heart,
    Aaron and thou look down into this den,
    And see a fearful sight of blood and death.
  QUINTUS. Aaron is gone, and my compassionate heart
    Will not permit mine eyes once to behold
    The thing whereat it trembles by surmise;
    O, tell me who it is, for ne'er till now
    Was I a child to fear I know not what.
  MARTIUS. Lord Bassianus lies beray'd in blood,
    All on a heap, like to a slaughtered lamb,
    In this detested, dark, blood-drinking pit.
  QUINTUS. If it be dark, how dost thou know 'tis he?
  MARTIUS. Upon his bloody finger he doth wear
    A precious ring that lightens all this hole,
    Which, like a taper in some monument,
    Doth shine upon the dead man's earthy cheeks,
    And shows the ragged entrails of this pit;
    So pale did shine the moon on Pyramus
    When he by night lay bath'd in maiden blood.
    O brother, help me with thy fainting hand-
    If fear hath made thee faint, as me it hath-
    Out of this fell devouring receptacle,
    As hateful as Cocytus' misty mouth.
  QUINTUS. Reach me thy hand, that I may help thee out,
    Or, wanting strength to do thee so much good,
    I may be pluck'd into the swallowing womb
    Of this deep pit, poor Bassianus' grave.
    I have no strength to pluck thee to the brink.
  MARTIUS. Nor I no strength to climb without thy help.
  QUINTUS. Thy hand once more; I will not loose again,
    Till thou art here aloft, or I below.
    Thou canst not come to me- I come to thee.        [Falls in]

            Enter the EMPEROR and AARON the Moor

  SATURNINUS. Along with me! I'll see what hole is here,
    And what he is that now is leapt into it.
    Say, who art thou that lately didst descend
    Into this gaping hollow of the earth?
  MARTIUS. The unhappy sons of old Andronicus,
    Brought hither in a most unlucky hour,
    To find thy brother Bassianus dead.
  SATURNINUS. My brother dead! I know thou dost but jest:
    He and his lady both are at the lodge
    Upon the north side of this pleasant chase;
    'Tis not an hour since I left them there.
  MARTIUS. We know not where you left them all alive;
    But, out alas! here have we found him dead.

                   Re-enter TAMORA, with
         attendants; TITUS ANDRONICUS and Lucius

  TAMORA. Where is my lord the King?
  SATURNINUS. Here, Tamora; though griev'd with killing grief.
  TAMORA. Where is thy brother Bassianus?
  SATURNINUS. Now to the bottom dost thou search my wound;
    Poor Bassianus here lies murdered.
  TAMORA. Then all too late I bring this fatal writ,
    The complot of this timeless tragedy;
    And wonder greatly that man's face can fold
    In pleasing smiles such murderous tyranny.
                                 [She giveth SATURNINE a letter]
    SATURNINUS.  [Reads]  'An if we miss to meet him handsomely,
    Sweet huntsman- Bassianus 'tis we mean-
    Do thou so much as dig the grave for him.
    Thou know'st our meaning. Look for thy reward
    Among the nettles at the elder-tree
    Which overshades the mouth of that same pit
    Where we decreed to bury Bassianus.
    Do this, and purchase us thy lasting friends.'
    O Tamora! was ever heard the like?
    This is the pit and this the elder-tree.
    Look, sirs, if you can find the huntsman out
    That should have murdered Bassianus here.
  AARON. My gracious lord, here is the bag of gold.
  SATURNINUS.  [To TITUS]  Two of thy whelps, fell curs of bloody
      kind,
    Have here bereft my brother of his life.
    Sirs, drag them from the pit unto the prison;
    There let them bide until we have devis'd
    Some never-heard-of torturing pain for them.
  TAMORA. What, are they in this pit? O wondrous thing!
    How easily murder is discovered!
  TITUS. High Emperor, upon my feeble knee
    I beg this boon, with tears not lightly shed,
    That this fell fault of my accursed sons-
    Accursed if the fault be prov'd in them-
  SATURNINUS. If it be prov'd! You see it is apparent.
    Who found this letter? Tamora, was it you?
  TAMORA. Andronicus himself did take it up.
  TITUS. I did, my lord, yet let me be their bail;
    For, by my fathers' reverend tomb, I vow
    They shall be ready at your Highness' will
    To answer their suspicion with their lives.
  SATURNINUS. Thou shalt not bail them; see thou follow me.
    Some bring the murdered body, some the murderers;
    Let them not speak a word- the guilt is plain;
    For, by my soul, were there worse end than death,
    That end upon them should be executed.
  TAMORA. Andronicus, I will entreat the King.
    Fear not thy sons; they shall do well enough.
  TITUS. Come, Lucius, come; stay not to talk with them.     Exeunt
                          SCENE IV.
                 Another part of the forest

        Enter the Empress' sons, DEMETRIUS and CHIRON,
    with LAVINIA, her hands cut off, and her tongue cut out,
                        and ravish'd

  DEMETRIUS. So, now go tell, an if thy tongue can speak,
    Who 'twas that cut thy tongue and ravish'd thee.
  CHIRON. Write down thy mind, bewray thy meaning so,
    An if thy stumps will let thee play the scribe.
  DEMETRIUS. See how with signs and tokens she can scrowl.
  CHIRON. Go home, call for sweet water, wash thy hands.
  DEMETRIUS. She hath no tongue to call, nor hands to wash;
    And so let's leave her to her silent walks.
  CHIRON. An 'twere my cause, I should go hang myself.
  DEMETRIUS. If thou hadst hands to help thee knit the cord.
                                     Exeunt DEMETRIUS and CHIRON

           Wind horns. Enter MARCUS, from hunting

  MARCUS. Who is this?- my niece, that flies away so fast?
    Cousin, a word: where is your husband?
    If I do dream, would all my wealth would wake me!
    If I do wake, some planet strike me down,
    That I may slumber an eternal sleep!
    Speak, gentle niece. What stern ungentle hands
    Hath lopp'd, and hew'd, and made thy body bare
    Of her two branches- those sweet ornaments
    Whose circling shadows kings have sought to sleep in,
    And might not gain so great a happiness
    As half thy love? Why dost not speak to me?
    Alas, a crimson river of warm blood,
    Like to a bubbling fountain stirr'd with wind,
    Doth rise and fall between thy rosed lips,
    Coming and going with thy honey breath.
    But sure some Tereus hath deflowered thee,
    And, lest thou shouldst detect him, cut thy tongue.
    Ah, now thou turn'st away thy face for shame!
    And notwithstanding all this loss of blood-
    As from a conduit with three issuing spouts-
    Yet do thy cheeks look red as Titan's face
    Blushing to be encount'red with a cloud.
    Shall I speak for thee? Shall I say 'tis so?
    O, that I knew thy heart, and knew the beast,
    That I might rail at him to ease my mind!
    Sorrow concealed, like an oven stopp'd,
    Doth burn the heart to cinders where it is.
    Fair Philomel, why she but lost her tongue,
    And in a tedious sampler sew'd her mind;
    But, lovely niece, that mean is cut from thee.
    A craftier Tereus, cousin, hast thou met,
    And he hath cut those pretty fingers off
    That could have better sew'd than Philomel.
    O, had the monster seen those lily hands
    Tremble like aspen leaves upon a lute
    And make the silken strings delight to kiss them,
    He would not then have touch'd them for his life!
    Or had he heard the heavenly harmony
    Which that sweet tongue hath made,
    He would have dropp'd his knife, and fell asleep,
    As Cerberus at the Thracian poet's feet.
    Come, let us go, and make thy father blind,
    For such a sight will blind a father's eye;
    One hour's storm will drown the fragrant meads,
    What will whole months of tears thy father's eyes?
    Do not draw back, for we will mourn with thee;
    O, could our mourning case thy misery!                Exeunt
                     ACT III. SCENE I.
                     Rome. A street

       Enter the JUDGES, TRIBUNES, and SENATORS, with
     TITUS' two sons MARTIUS and QUINTUS bound, passing
         on the stage to the place of execution, and
               TITUS going before, pleading

  TITUS. Hear me, grave fathers; noble Tribunes, stay!
    For pity of mine age, whose youth was spent
    In dangerous wars whilst you securely slept;
    For all my blood in Rome's great quarrel shed,
    For all the frosty nights that I have watch'd,
    And for these bitter tears, which now you see
    Filling the aged wrinkles in my cheeks,
    Be pitiful to my condemned sons,
    Whose souls are not corrupted as 'tis thought.
    For two and twenty sons I never wept,
    Because they died in honour's lofty bed.
                          [ANDRONICUS lieth down, and the judges
                     pass by him with the prisoners, and exeunt]
    For these, Tribunes, in the dust I write
    My heart's deep languor and my soul's sad tears.
    Let my tears stanch the earth's dry appetite;
    My sons' sweet blood will make it shame and blush.
    O earth, I will befriend thee more with rain
    That shall distil from these two ancient urns,
    Than youthful April shall with all his show'rs.
    In summer's drought I'll drop upon thee still;
    In winter with warm tears I'll melt the snow
    And keep eternal spring-time on thy face,
    So thou refuse to drink my dear sons' blood.

             Enter Lucius with his weapon drawn

    O reverend Tribunes! O gentle aged men!
    Unbind my sons, reverse the doom of death,
    And let me say, that never wept before,
    My tears are now prevailing orators.
  LUCIUS. O noble father, you lament in vain;
    The Tribunes hear you not, no man is by,
    And you recount your sorrows to a stone.
  TITUS. Ah, Lucius, for thy brothers let me plead!
    Grave Tribunes, once more I entreat of you.
  LUCIUS. My gracious lord, no tribune hears you speak.
  TITUS. Why, 'tis no matter, man: if they did hear,
    They would not mark me; if they did mark,
    They would not pity me; yet plead I must,
    And bootless unto them.
    Therefore I tell my sorrows to the stones;
    Who though they cannot answer my distress,
    Yet in some sort they are better than the Tribunes,
    For that they will not intercept my tale.
    When I do weep, they humbly at my feet
    Receive my tears, and seem to weep with me;
    And were they but attired in grave weeds,
    Rome could afford no tribunes like to these.
    A stone is soft as wax: tribunes more hard than stones.
    A stone is silent and offendeth not,
    And tribunes with their tongues doom men to death.
                                                         [Rises]
    But wherefore stand'st thou with thy weapon drawn?
  LUCIUS. To rescue my two brothers from their death;
    For which attempt the judges have pronounc'd
    My everlasting doom of banishment.
  TITUS. O happy man! they have befriended thee.
    Why, foolish Lucius, dost thou not perceive
    That Rome is but a wilderness of tigers?
    Tigers must prey, and Rome affords no prey
    But me and mine; how happy art thou then
    From these devourers to be banished!
    But who comes with our brother Marcus here?

                 Enter MARCUS with LAVINIA

  MARCUS. Titus, prepare thy aged eyes to weep,
    Or if not so, thy noble heart to break.
    I bring consuming sorrow to thine age.
  TITUS. Will it consume me? Let me see it then.
  MARCUS. This was thy daughter.
  TITUS. Why, Marcus, so she is.
  LUCIUS. Ay me! this object kills me.
  TITUS. Faint-hearted boy, arise, and look upon her.
    Speak, Lavinia, what accursed hand
    Hath made thee handless in thy father's sight?
    What fool hath added water to the sea,
    Or brought a fagot to bright-burning Troy?
    My grief was at the height before thou cam'st,
    And now like Nilus it disdaineth bounds.
    Give me a sword, I'll chop off my hands too,
    For they have fought for Rome, and all in vain;
    And they have nurs'd this woe in feeding life;
    In bootless prayer have they been held up,
    And they have serv'd me to effectless use.
    Now all the service I require of them
    Is that the one will help to cut the other.
    'Tis well, Lavinia, that thou hast no hands;
    For hands to do Rome service is but vain.
  LUCIUS. Speak, gentle sister, who hath martyr'd thee?
  MARCUS. O, that delightful engine of her thoughts
    That blabb'd them with such pleasing eloquence
    Is torn from forth that pretty hollow cage,
    Where like a sweet melodious bird it sung
    Sweet varied notes, enchanting every ear!
  LUCIUS. O, say thou for her, who hath done this deed?
  MARCUS. O, thus I found her straying in the park,
    Seeking to hide herself as doth the deer
    That hath receiv'd some unrecuring wound.
  TITUS. It was my dear, and he that wounded her
    Hath hurt me more than had he kill'd me dead;
    For now I stand as one upon a rock,
    Environ'd with a wilderness of sea,
    Who marks the waxing tide grow wave by wave,
    Expecting ever when some envious surge
    Will in his brinish bowels swallow him.
    This way to death my wretched sons are gone;
    Here stands my other son, a banish'd man,
    And here my brother, weeping at my woes.
    But that which gives my soul the greatest spurn
    Is dear Lavinia, dearer than my soul.
    Had I but seen thy picture in this plight,
    It would have madded me; what shall I do
    Now I behold thy lively body so?
    Thou hast no hands to wipe away thy tears,
    Nor tongue to tell me who hath martyr'd thee;
    Thy husband he is dead, and for his death
    Thy brothers are condemn'd, and dead by this.
    Look, Marcus! Ah, son Lucius, look on her!
    When I did name her brothers, then fresh tears
    Stood on her cheeks, as doth the honey dew
    Upon a gath'red lily almost withered.
  MARCUS. Perchance she weeps because they kill'd her husband;
    Perchance because she knows them innocent.
  TITUS. If they did kill thy husband, then be joyful,
    Because the law hath ta'en revenge on them.
    No, no, they would not do so foul a deed;
    Witness the sorrow that their sister makes.
    Gentle Lavinia, let me kiss thy lips,
    Or make some sign how I may do thee ease.
    Shall thy good uncle and thy brother Lucius
    And thou and I sit round about some fountain,
    Looking all downwards to behold our cheeks
    How they are stain'd, like meadows yet not dry
    With miry slime left on them by a flood?
    And in the fountain shall we gaze so long,
    Till the fresh taste be taken from that clearness,
    And made a brine-pit with our bitter tears?
    Or shall we cut away our hands like thine?
    Or shall we bite our tongues, and in dumb shows
    Pass the remainder of our hateful days?
    What shall we do? Let us that have our tongues
    Plot some device of further misery
    To make us wonder'd at in time to come.
  LUCIUS. Sweet father, cease your tears; for at your grief
    See how my wretched sister sobs and weeps.
  MARCUS. Patience, dear niece. Good Titus, dry thine eyes.
  TITUS. Ah, Marcus, Marcus! Brother, well I wot
    Thy napkin cannot drink a tear of mine,
    For thou, poor man, hast drown'd it with thine own.
  LUCIUS. Ah, my Lavinia, I will wipe thy cheeks.
  TITUS. Mark, Marcus, mark! I understand her signs.
    Had she a tongue to speak, now would she say
    That to her brother which I said to thee:
    His napkin, with his true tears all bewet,
    Can do no service on her sorrowful cheeks.
    O, what a sympathy of woe is this
    As far from help as Limbo is from bliss!

                   Enter AARON the Moor

  AARON. Titus Andronicus, my lord the Emperor
    Sends thee this word, that, if thou love thy sons,
    Let Marcus, Lucius, or thyself, old Titus,
    Or any one of you, chop off your hand
    And send it to the King: he for the same
    Will send thee hither both thy sons alive,
    And that shall be the ransom for their fault.
  TITUS. O gracious Emperor! O gentle Aaron!
    Did ever raven sing so like a lark
    That gives sweet tidings of the sun's uprise?
    With all my heart I'll send the Emperor my hand.
    Good Aaron, wilt thou help to chop it off?
  LUCIUS. Stay, father! for that noble hand of thine,
    That hath thrown down so many enemies,
    Shall not be sent. My hand will serve the turn,
    My youth can better spare my blood than you,
    And therefore mine shall save my brothers' lives.
  MARCUS. Which of your hands hath not defended Rome
    And rear'd aloft the bloody battle-axe,
    Writing destruction on the enemy's castle?
    O, none of both but are of high desert!
    My hand hath been but idle; let it serve
    To ransom my two nephews from their death;
    Then have I kept it to a worthy end.
  AARON. Nay, come, agree whose hand shall go along,
    For fear they die before their pardon come.
  MARCUS. My hand shall go.
  LUCIUS. By heaven, it shall not go!
  TITUS. Sirs, strive no more; such with'red herbs as these
    Are meet for plucking up, and therefore mine.
  LUCIUS. Sweet father, if I shall be thought thy son,
    Let me redeem my brothers both from death.
  MARCUS. And for our father's sake and mother's care,
    Now let me show a brother's love to thee.
  TITUS. Agree between you; I will spare my hand.
  LUCIUS. Then I'll go fetch an axe.
  MARCUS. But I will use the axe.
                                        Exeunt LUCIUS and MARCUS
  TITUS. Come hither, Aaron, I'll deceive them both;
    Lend me thy hand, and I will give thee mine.
  AARON.  [Aside]  If that be call'd deceit, I will be honest,
    And never whilst I live deceive men so;
    But I'll deceive you in another sort,
    And that you'll say ere half an hour pass.
                                       [He cuts off TITUS' hand]

                 Re-enter LUCIUS and MARCUS

 TITUS. Now stay your strife. What shall be is dispatch'd.
    Good Aaron, give his Majesty my hand;
    Tell him it was a hand that warded him
    From thousand dangers; bid him bury it.
    More hath it merited- that let it have.
    As for my sons, say I account of them
    As jewels purchas'd at an easy price;
    And yet dear too, because I bought mine own.
  AARON. I go, Andronicus; and for thy hand
    Look by and by to have thy sons with thee.
    [Aside]  Their heads I mean. O, how this villainy
    Doth fat me with the very thoughts of it!
    Let fools do good, and fair men call for grace:
    Aaron will have his soul black like his face.           Exit
  TITUS. O, here I lift this one hand up to heaven,
    And bow this feeble ruin to the earth;
    If any power pities wretched tears,
    To that I call!  [To LAVINIA]  What, would'st thou kneel with me?
    Do, then, dear heart; for heaven shall hear our prayers,
    Or with our sighs we'll breathe the welkin dim
    And stain the sun with fog, as sometime clouds
    When they do hug him in their melting bosoms.
  MARCUS. O brother, speak with possibility,
    And do not break into these deep extremes.
  TITUS. Is not my sorrow deep, having no bottom?
    Then be my passions bottomless with them.
  MARCUS. But yet let reason govern thy lament.
  TITUS. If there were reason for these miseries,
    Then into limits could I bind my woes.
    When heaven doth weep, doth not the earth o'erflow?
    If the winds rage, doth not the sea wax mad,
    Threat'ning the welkin with his big-swol'n face?
    And wilt thou have a reason for this coil?
    I am the sea; hark how her sighs do blow.
    She is the weeping welkin, I the earth;
    Then must my sea be moved with her sighs;
    Then must my earth with her continual tears
    Become a deluge, overflow'd and drown'd;
    For why my bowels cannot hide her woes,
    But like a drunkard must I vomit them.
    Then give me leave; for losers will have leave
    To ease their stomachs with their bitter tongues.

        Enter a MESSENGER, with two heads and a hand

  MESSENGER. Worthy Andronicus, ill art thou repaid
    For that good hand thou sent'st the Emperor.
    Here are the heads of thy two noble sons;
    And here's thy hand, in scorn to thee sent back-
    Thy grief their sports, thy resolution mock'd,
    That woe is me to think upon thy woes,
    More than remembrance of my father's death.             Exit
  MARCUS. Now let hot Aetna cool in Sicily,
    And be my heart an ever-burning hell!
    These miseries are more than may be borne.
    To weep with them that weep doth ease some deal,
    But sorrow flouted at is double death.
  LUCIUS. Ah, that this sight should make so deep a wound,
    And yet detested life not shrink thereat!
    That ever death should let life bear his name,
    Where life hath no more interest but to breathe!
                                          [LAVINIA kisses TITUS]
  MARCUS. Alas, poor heart, that kiss is comfortless
    As frozen water to a starved snake.
  TITUS. When will this fearful slumber have an end?
  MARCUS. Now farewell, flatt'ry; die, Andronicus.
    Thou dost not slumber: see thy two sons' heads,
    Thy warlike hand, thy mangled daughter here;
    Thy other banish'd son with this dear sight
    Struck pale and bloodless; and thy brother, I,
    Even like a stony image, cold and numb.
    Ah! now no more will I control thy griefs.
    Rent off thy silver hair, thy other hand
    Gnawing with thy teeth; and be this dismal sight
    The closing up of our most wretched eyes.
    Now is a time to storm; why art thou still?
  TITUS. Ha, ha, ha!
  MARCUS. Why dost thou laugh? It fits not with this hour.
  TITUS. Why, I have not another tear to shed;
    Besides, this sorrow is an enemy,
    And would usurp upon my wat'ry eyes
    And make them blind with tributary tears.
    Then which way shall I find Revenge's cave?
    For these two heads do seem to speak to me,
    And threat me I shall never come to bliss
    Till all these mischiefs be return'd again
    Even in their throats that have committed them.
    Come, let me see what task I have to do.
    You heavy people, circle me about,
    That I may turn me to each one of you
    And swear unto my soul to right your wrongs.
    The vow is made. Come, brother, take a head,
    And in this hand the other will I bear.
    And, Lavinia, thou shalt be employ'd in this;
    Bear thou my hand, sweet wench, between thy teeth.
    As for thee, boy, go, get thee from my sight;
    Thou art an exile, and thou must not stay.
    Hie to the Goths and raise an army there;
    And if ye love me, as I think you do,
    Let's kiss and part, for we have much to do.
                                           Exeunt all but Lucius
  LUCIUS. Farewell, Andronicus, my noble father,
    The woefull'st man that ever liv'd in Rome.
    Farewell, proud Rome; till Lucius come again,
    He leaves his pledges dearer than his life.
    Farewell, Lavinia, my noble sister;
    O, would thou wert as thou tofore hast been!
    But now nor Lucius nor Lavinia lives
    But in oblivion and hateful griefs.
    If Lucius live, he will requite your wrongs
    And make proud Saturnine and his emperess
    Beg at the gates like Tarquin and his queen.
    Now will I to the Goths, and raise a pow'r
    To be reveng'd on Rome and Saturnine.                   Exit
                          SCENE II.
                     Rome. TITUS' house

                          A banquet.
    Enter TITUS, MARCUS, LAVINIA, and the boy YOUNG LUCIUS

  TITUS. So so, now sit; and look you eat no more
    Than will preserve just so much strength in us
    As will revenge these bitter woes of ours.
    Marcus, unknit that sorrow-wreathen knot;
    Thy niece and I, poor creatures, want our hands,
    And cannot passionate our tenfold grief
    With folded arms. This poor right hand of mine
    Is left to tyrannize upon my breast;
    Who, when my heart, all mad with misery,
    Beats in this hollow prison of my flesh,
    Then thus I thump it down.
    [To LAVINIA]  Thou map of woe, that thus dost talk in signs!
    When thy poor heart beats with outrageous beating,
    Thou canst not strike it thus to make it still.
    Wound it with sighing, girl, kill it with groans;
    Or get some little knife between thy teeth
    And just against thy heart make thou a hole,
    That all the tears that thy poor eyes let fall
    May run into that sink and, soaking in,
    Drown the lamenting fool in sea-salt tears.
  MARCUS. Fie, brother, fie! Teach her not thus to lay
    Such violent hands upon her tender life.
  TITUS. How now! Has sorrow made thee dote already?
    Why, Marcus, no man should be mad but I.
    What violent hands can she lay on her life?
    Ah, wherefore dost thou urge the name of hands?
    To bid Aeneas tell the tale twice o'er
    How Troy was burnt and he made miserable?
    O, handle not the theme, to talk of hands,
    Lest we remember still that we have none.
    Fie, fie, how franticly I square my talk,
    As if we should forget we had no hands,
    If Marcus did not name the word of hands!
    Come, let's fall to; and, gentle girl, eat this:
    Here is no drink. Hark, Marcus, what she says-
    I can interpret all her martyr'd signs;
    She says she drinks no other drink but tears,
    Brew'd with her sorrow, mesh'd upon her cheeks.
    Speechless complainer, I will learn thy thought;
    In thy dumb action will I be as perfect
    As begging hermits in their holy prayers.
    Thou shalt not sigh, nor hold thy stumps to heaven,
    Nor wink, nor nod, nor kneel, nor make a sign,
    But I of these will wrest an alphabet,
    And by still practice learn to know thy meaning.
  BOY. Good grandsire, leave these bitter deep laments;
    Make my aunt merry with some pleasing tale.
  MARCUS. Alas, the tender boy, in passion mov'd,
    Doth weep to see his grandsire's heaviness.
  TITUS. Peace, tender sapling; thou art made of tears,
    And tears will quickly melt thy life away.
                          [MARCUS strikes the dish with a knife]
    What dost thou strike at, Marcus, with thy knife?
  MARCUS. At that that I have kill'd, my lord- a fly.
  TITUS. Out on thee, murderer, thou kill'st my heart!
    Mine eyes are cloy'd with view of tyranny;
    A deed of death done on the innocent
    Becomes not Titus' brother. Get thee gone;
    I see thou art not for my company.
  MARCUS. Alas, my lord, I have but kill'd a fly.
  TITUS. 'But!' How if that fly had a father and mother?
    How would he hang his slender gilded wings
    And buzz lamenting doings in the air!
    Poor harmless fly,
    That with his pretty buzzing melody
    Came here to make us merry! And thou hast kill'd him.
  MARCUS. Pardon me, sir; it was a black ill-favour'd fly,
    Like to the Empress' Moor; therefore I kill'd him.
  TITUS. O, O, O!
    Then pardon me for reprehending thee,
    For thou hast done a charitable deed.
    Give me thy knife, I will insult on him,
    Flattering myself as if it were the Moor
    Come hither purposely to poison me.
    There's for thyself, and that's for Tamora.
    Ah, sirrah!
    Yet, I think, we are not brought so low
    But that between us we can kill a fly
    That comes in likeness of a coal-black Moor.
  MARCUS. Alas, poor man! grief has so wrought on him,
    He takes false shadows for true substances.
  TITUS. Come, take away. Lavinia, go with me;
    I'll to thy closet, and go read with thee
    Sad stories chanced in the times of old.
    Come, boy, and go with me; thy sight is young,
    And thou shalt read when mine begin to dazzle.        Exeunt
                      ACT IV. SCENE I.
                    Rome. TITUS' garden

         Enter YOUNG LUCIUS and LAVINIA running after him,
     and the boy flies from her with his books under his arm.
                   Enter TITUS and MARCUS

  BOY. Help, grandsire, help! my aunt Lavinia
    Follows me everywhere, I know not why.
    Good uncle Marcus, see how swift she comes!
    Alas, sweet aunt, I know not what you mean.
  MARCUS. Stand by me, Lucius; do not fear thine aunt.
  TITUS. She loves thee, boy, too well to do thee harm.
  BOY. Ay, when my father was in Rome she did.
  MARCUS. What means my niece Lavinia by these signs?
  TITUS. Fear her not, Lucius; somewhat doth she mean.
    See, Lucius, see how much she makes of thee.
    Somewhither would she have thee go with her.
    Ah, boy, Cornelia never with more care
    Read to her sons than she hath read to thee
    Sweet poetry and Tully's Orator.
  MARCUS. Canst thou not guess wherefore she plies thee thus?
  BOY. My lord, I know not, I, nor can I guess,
    Unless some fit or frenzy do possess her;
    For I have heard my grandsire say full oft
    Extremity of griefs would make men mad;
    And I have read that Hecuba of Troy
    Ran mad for sorrow. That made me to fear;
    Although, my lord, I know my noble aunt
    Loves me as dear as e'er my mother did,
    And would not, but in fury, fright my youth;
    Which made me down to throw my books, and fly-
    Causeless, perhaps. But pardon me, sweet aunt;
    And, madam, if my uncle Marcus go,
    I will most willingly attend your ladyship.
  MARCUS. Lucius, I will.           [LAVINIA turns over with her
                     stumps the books which Lucius has let fall]
  TITUS. How now, Lavinia! Marcus, what means this?
    Some book there is that she desires to see.
    Which is it, girl, of these?- Open them, boy.-
    But thou art deeper read and better skill'd;
    Come and take choice of all my library,
    And so beguile thy sorrow, till the heavens
    Reveal the damn'd contriver of this deed.
    Why lifts she up her arms in sequence thus?
  MARCUS. I think she means that there were more than one
    Confederate in the fact; ay, more there was,
    Or else to heaven she heaves them for revenge.
  TITUS. Lucius, what book is that she tosseth so?
  BOY. Grandsire, 'tis Ovid's Metamorphoses;
    My mother gave it me.
  MARCUS. For love of her that's gone,
    Perhaps she cull'd it from among the rest.
  TITUS. Soft! So busily she turns the leaves! Help her.
    What would she find? Lavinia, shall I read?
    This is the tragic tale of Philomel
    And treats of Tereus' treason and his rape;
    And rape, I fear, was root of thy annoy.
  MARCUS. See, brother, see! Note how she quotes the leaves.
  TITUS. Lavinia, wert thou thus surpris'd, sweet girl,
    Ravish'd and wrong'd as Philomela was,
    Forc'd in the ruthless, vast, and gloomy woods?
    See, see!
    Ay, such a place there is where we did hunt-
    O, had we never, never hunted there!-
    Pattern'd by that the poet here describes,
    By nature made for murders and for rapes.
  MARCUS. O, why should nature build so foul a den,
    Unless the gods delight in tragedies?
  TITUS. Give signs, sweet girl, for here are none but friends,
    What Roman lord it was durst do the deed.
    Or slunk not Saturnine, as Tarquin erst,
    That left the camp to sin in Lucrece' bed?
  MARCUS. Sit down, sweet niece; brother, sit down by me.
    Apollo, Pallas, Jove, or Mercury,
    Inspire me, that I may this treason find!
    My lord, look here! Look here, Lavinia!
                                    [He writes his name with his
                       staff, and guides it with feet and mouth]
    This sandy plot is plain; guide, if thou canst,
    This after me. I have writ my name
    Without the help of any hand at all.
    Curs'd be that heart that forc'd us to this shift!
    Write thou, good niece, and here display at last
    What God will have discovered for revenge.
    Heaven guide thy pen to print thy sorrows plain,
    That we may know the traitors and the truth!
                               [She takes the staff in her mouth
                          and guides it with stumps, and writes]
    O, do ye read, my lord, what she hath writ?
  TITUS. 'Stuprum- Chiron- Demetrius.'
  MARCUS. What, what! the lustful sons of Tamora
    Performers of this heinous bloody deed?
  TITUS. Magni Dominator poli,
    Tam lentus audis scelera? tam lentus vides?
  MARCUS. O, calm thee, gentle lord! although I know
    There is enough written upon this earth
    To stir a mutiny in the mildest thoughts,
    And arm the minds of infants to exclaims.
    My lord, kneel down with me; Lavinia, kneel;
    And kneel, sweet boy, the Roman Hector's hope;
    And swear with me- as, with the woeful fere
    And father of that chaste dishonoured dame,
    Lord Junius Brutus sware for Lucrece' rape-
    That we will prosecute, by good advice,
    Mortal revenge upon these traitorous Goths,
    And see their blood or die with this reproach.
  TITUS. 'Tis sure enough, an you knew how;
    But if you hunt these bear-whelps, then beware:
    The dam will wake; and if she wind ye once,
    She's with the lion deeply still in league,
    And lulls him whilst she playeth on her back,
    And when he sleeps will she do what she list.
    You are a young huntsman, Marcus; let alone;
    And come, I will go get a leaf of brass,
    And with a gad of steel will write these words,
    And lay it by. The angry northern wind
    Will blow these sands like Sibyl's leaves abroad,
    And where's our lesson, then? Boy, what say you?
  BOY. I say, my lord, that if I were a man
    Their mother's bedchamber should not be safe
    For these base bondmen to the yoke of Rome.
  MARCUS. Ay, that's my boy! Thy father hath full oft
    For his ungrateful country done the like.
  BOY. And, uncle, so will I, an if I live.
  TITUS. Come, go with me into mine armoury.
    Lucius, I'll fit thee; and withal my boy
    Shall carry from me to the Empress' sons
    Presents that I intend to send them both.
    Come, come; thou'lt do my message, wilt thou not?
  BOY. Ay, with my dagger in their bosoms, grandsire.
  TITUS. No, boy, not so; I'll teach thee another course.
    Lavinia, come. Marcus, look to my house.
    Lucius and I'll go brave it at the court;
    Ay, marry, will we, sir! and we'll be waited on.
                         Exeunt TITUS, LAVINIA, and YOUNG LUCIUS
  MARCUS. O heavens, can you hear a good man groan
    And not relent, or not compassion him?
    Marcus, attend him in his ecstasy,
    That hath more scars of sorrow in his heart
    Than foemen's marks upon his batt'red shield,
    But yet so just that he will not revenge.
    Revenge the heavens for old Andronicus!                 Exit
                          SCENE II.
                     Rome. The palace

       Enter AARON, DEMETRIUS and CHIRON, at one door;
     and at the other door, YOUNG LUCIUS and another with
        a bundle of weapons, and verses writ upon them

  CHIRON. Demetrius, here's the son of Lucius;
    He hath some message to deliver us.
  AARON. Ay, some mad message from his mad grandfather.
  BOY. My lords, with all the humbleness I may,
    I greet your honours from Andronicus-
    [Aside]  And pray the Roman gods confound you both!
  DEMETRIUS. Gramercy, lovely Lucius. What's the news?
  BOY.  [Aside]  That you are both decipher'd, that's the news,
    For villains mark'd with rape.- May it please you,
    My grandsire, well advis'd, hath sent by me
    The goodliest weapons of his armoury
    To gratify your honourable youth,
    The hope of Rome; for so he bid me say;
    And so I do, and with his gifts present
    Your lordships, that, whenever you have need,
    You may be armed and appointed well.
    And so I leave you both-  [Aside]  like bloody villains.
                               Exeunt YOUNG LUCIUS and attendant
  DEMETRIUS. What's here? A scroll, and written round about.
    Let's see:
    [Reads]  'Integer vitae, scelerisque purus,
    Non eget Mauri iaculis, nec arcu.'
  CHIRON. O, 'tis a verse in Horace, I know it well;
    I read it in the grammar long ago.
  AARON. Ay, just- a verse in Horace. Right, you have it.
    [Aside]  Now, what a thing it is to be an ass!
    Here's no sound jest! The old man hath found their guilt,
    And sends them weapons wrapp'd about with lines
    That wound, beyond their feeling, to the quick.
    But were our witty Empress well afoot,
    She would applaud Andronicus' conceit.
    But let her rest in her unrest awhile-
    And now, young lords, was't not a happy star
    Led us to Rome, strangers, and more than so,
    Captives, to be advanced to this height?
    It did me good before the palace gate
    To brave the Tribune in his brother's hearing.
  DEMETRIUS. But me more good to see so great a lord
    Basely insinuate and send us gifts.
  AARON. Had he not reason, Lord Demetrius?
    Did you not use his daughter very friendly?
  DEMETRIUS. I would we had a thousand Roman dames
    At such a bay, by turn to serve our lust.
  CHIRON. A charitable wish and full of love.
  AARON. Here lacks but your mother for to say amen.
  CHIRON. And that would she for twenty thousand more.
  DEMETRIUS. Come, let us go and pray to all the gods
    For our beloved mother in her pains.
  AARON.  [Aside]  Pray to the devils; the gods have given us over.
                                                [Trumpets sound]
  DEMETRIUS. Why do the Emperor's trumpets flourish thus?
  CHIRON. Belike, for joy the Emperor hath a son.
  DEMETRIUS. Soft! who comes here?

            Enter NURSE, with a blackamoor CHILD

  NURSE. Good morrow, lords.
    O, tell me, did you see Aaron the Moor?
  AARON. Well, more or less, or ne'er a whit at all,
    Here Aaron is; and what with Aaron now?
  NURSE. O gentle Aaron, we are all undone!
    Now help, or woe betide thee evermore!
  AARON. Why, what a caterwauling dost thou keep!
    What dost thou wrap and fumble in thy arms?
  NURSE. O, that which I would hide from heaven's eye:
    Our Empress' shame and stately Rome's disgrace!
    She is delivered, lord; she is delivered.
  AARON. To whom?
  NURSE. I mean she is brought a-bed.
  AARON. Well, God give her good rest! What hath he sent her?
  NURSE. A devil.
  AARON. Why, then she is the devil's dam;
    A joyful issue.
  NURSE. A joyless, dismal, black, and sorrowful issue!
    Here is the babe, as loathsome as a toad
    Amongst the fair-fac'd breeders of our clime;
    The Empress sends it thee, thy stamp, thy seal,
    And bids thee christen it with thy dagger's point.
  AARON. Zounds, ye whore! Is black so base a hue?
    Sweet blowse, you are a beauteous blossom sure.
  DEMETRIUS. Villain, what hast thou done?
  AARON. That which thou canst not undo.
  CHIRON. Thou hast undone our mother.
  AARON. Villain, I have done thy mother.
  DEMETRIUS. And therein, hellish dog, thou hast undone her.
    Woe to her chance, and damn'd her loathed choice!
    Accurs'd the offspring of so foul a fiend!
  CHIRON. It shall not live.
  AARON. It shall not die.
  NURSE. Aaron, it must; the mother wills it so.
  AARON. What, must it, nurse? Then let no man but I
    Do execution on my flesh and blood.
  DEMETRIUS. I'll broach the tadpole on my rapier's point.
    Nurse, give it me; my sword shall soon dispatch it.
  AARON. Sooner this sword shall plough thy bowels up.
                     [Takes the CHILD from the NURSE, and draws]
    Stay, murderous villains, will you kill your brother!
    Now, by the burning tapers of the sky
    That shone so brightly when this boy was got,
    He dies upon my scimitar's sharp point
    That touches this my first-born son and heir.
    I tell you, younglings, not Enceladus,
    With all his threat'ning band of Typhon's brood,
    Nor great Alcides, nor the god of war,
    Shall seize this prey out of his father's hands.
    What, what, ye sanguine, shallow-hearted boys!
    Ye white-lim'd walls! ye alehouse painted signs!
    Coal-black is better than another hue
    In that it scorns to bear another hue;
    For all the water in the ocean
    Can never turn the swan's black legs to white,
    Although she lave them hourly in the flood.
    Tell the Empress from me I am of age
    To keep mine own- excuse it how she can.
  DEMETRIUS. Wilt thou betray thy noble mistress thus?
  AARON. My mistress is my mistress: this my self,
    The vigour and the picture of my youth.
    This before all the world do I prefer;
    This maugre all the world will I keep safe,
    Or some of you shall smoke for it in Rome.
  DEMETRIUS. By this our mother is for ever sham'd.
  CHIRON. Rome will despise her for this foul escape.
  NURSE. The Emperor in his rage will doom her death.
  CHIRON. I blush to think upon this ignomy.
  AARON. Why, there's the privilege your beauty bears:
    Fie, treacherous hue, that will betray with blushing
    The close enacts and counsels of thy heart!
    Here's a young lad fram'd of another leer.
    Look how the black slave smiles upon the father,
    As who should say 'Old lad, I am thine own.'
    He is your brother, lords, sensibly fed
    Of that self-blood that first gave life to you;
    And from your womb where you imprisoned were
    He is enfranchised and come to light.
    Nay, he is your brother by the surer side,
    Although my seal be stamped in his face.
  NURSE. Aaron, what shall I say unto the Empress?
  DEMETRIUS. Advise thee, Aaron, what is to be done,
    And we will all subscribe to thy advice.
    Save thou the child, so we may all be safe.
  AARON. Then sit we down and let us all consult.
    My son and I will have the wind of you:
    Keep there; now talk at pleasure of your safety.
                                                      [They sit]
  DEMETRIUS. How many women saw this child of his?
  AARON. Why, so, brave lords! When we join in league
    I am a lamb; but if you brave the Moor,
    The chafed boar, the mountain lioness,
    The ocean swells not so as Aaron storms.
    But say, again, how many saw the child?
  NURSE. Cornelia the midwife and myself;
    And no one else but the delivered Empress.
  AARON. The Emperess, the midwife, and yourself.
    Two may keep counsel when the third's away:
    Go to the Empress, tell her this I said.      [He kills her]
    Weeke weeke!
    So cries a pig prepared to the spit.
  DEMETRIUS. What mean'st thou, Aaron? Wherefore didst thou this?
  AARON. O Lord, sir, 'tis a deed of policy.
    Shall she live to betray this guilt of ours-
    A long-tongu'd babbling gossip? No, lords, no.
    And now be it known to you my full intent:
    Not far, one Muliteus, my countryman-
    His wife but yesternight was brought to bed;
    His child is like to her, fair as you are.
    Go pack with him, and give the mother gold,
    And tell them both the circumstance of all,
    And how by this their child shall be advanc'd,
    And be received for the Emperor's heir
    And substituted in the place of mine,
    To calm this tempest whirling in the court;
    And let the Emperor dandle him for his own.
    Hark ye, lords. You see I have given her physic,
                                         [Pointing to the NURSE]
    And you must needs bestow her funeral;
    The fields are near, and you are gallant grooms.
    This done, see that you take no longer days,
    But send the midwife presently to me.
    The midwife and the nurse well made away,
    Then let the ladies tattle what they please.
  CHIRON. Aaron, I see thou wilt not trust the air
    With secrets.
  DEMETRIUS. For this care of Tamora,
    Herself and hers are highly bound to thee.

         Exeunt DEMETRIUS and CHIRON, bearing off the dead NURSE

  AARON. Now to the Goths, as swift as swallow flies,
    There to dispose this treasure in mine arms,
    And secretly to greet the Empress' friends.
    Come on, you thick-lipp'd slave, I'll bear you hence;
    For it is you that puts us to our shifts.
    I'll make you feed on berries and on roots,
    And feed on curds and whey, and suck the goat,
    And cabin in a cave, and bring you up
    To be a warrior and command a camp.
                                             Exit with the CHILD
                          SCENE III.
                     Rome. A public place

       Enter TITUS, bearing arrows with letters on the
    ends of them; with him MARCUS, YOUNG LUCIUS, and other
      gentlemen, PUBLIUS, SEMPRONIUS, and CAIUS, with bows

  TITUS. Come, Marcus, come; kinsmen, this is the way.
    Sir boy, let me see your archery;
    Look ye draw home enough, and 'tis there straight.
    Terras Astrea reliquit,
    Be you rememb'red, Marcus; she's gone, she's fled.
    Sirs, take you to your tools. You, cousins, shall
    Go sound the ocean and cast your nets;
    Happily you may catch her in the sea;
    Yet there's as little justice as at land.
    No; Publius and Sempronius, you must do it;
    'Tis you must dig with mattock and with spade,
    And pierce the inmost centre of the earth;
    Then, when you come to Pluto's region,
    I pray you deliver him this petition.
    Tell him it is for justice and for aid,
    And that it comes from old Andronicus,
    Shaken with sorrows in ungrateful Rome.
    Ah, Rome! Well, well, I made thee miserable
    What time I threw the people's suffrages
    On him that thus doth tyrannize o'er me.
    Go get you gone; and pray be careful all,
    And leave you not a man-of-war unsearch'd.
    This wicked Emperor may have shipp'd her hence;
    And, kinsmen, then we may go pipe for justice.
  MARCUS. O Publius, is not this a heavy case,
    To see thy noble uncle thus distract?
  PUBLIUS. Therefore, my lords, it highly us concerns
    By day and night t' attend him carefully,
    And feed his humour kindly as we may
    Till time beget some careful remedy.
  MARCUS. Kinsmen, his sorrows are past remedy.
    Join with the Goths, and with revengeful war
    Take wreak on Rome for this ingratitude,
    And vengeance on the traitor Saturnine.
  TITUS. Publius, how now? How now, my masters?
    What, have you met with her?
  PUBLIUS. No, my good lord; but Pluto sends you word,
    If you will have Revenge from hell, you shall.
    Marry, for Justice, she is so employ'd,
    He thinks, with Jove in heaven, or somewhere else,
    So that perforce you must needs stay a time.
  TITUS. He doth me wrong to feed me with delays.
    I'll dive into the burning lake below
    And pull her out of Acheron by the heels.
    Marcus, we are but shrubs, no cedars we,
    No big-bon'd men fram'd of the Cyclops' size;
    But metal, Marcus, steel to the very back,
    Yet wrung with wrongs more than our backs can bear;
    And, sith there's no justice in earth nor hell,
    We will solicit heaven, and move the gods
    To send down justice for to wreak our wrongs.
    Come, to this gear. You are a good archer, Marcus.
                                      [He gives them the arrows]
    'Ad Jovem' that's for you; here 'Ad Apollinem.'
    'Ad Martem' that's for myself.
    Here, boy, 'To Pallas'; here 'To Mercury.'
    'To Saturn,' Caius- not to Saturnine:
    You were as good to shoot against the wind.
    To it, boy. Marcus, loose when I bid.
    Of my word, I have written to effect;
    There's not a god left unsolicited.
  MARCUS. Kinsmen, shoot all your shafts into the court;
    We will afflict the Emperor in his pride.
  TITUS. Now, masters, draw.  [They shoot]  O, well said, Lucius!
    Good boy, in Virgo's lap! Give it Pallas.
  MARCUS. My lord, I aim a mile beyond the moon;
    Your letter is with Jupiter by this.
  TITUS. Ha! ha!
    Publius, Publius, hast thou done?
    See, see, thou hast shot off one of Taurus' horns.
  MARCUS. This was the sport, my lord: when Publius shot,
    The Bull, being gall'd, gave Aries such a knock
    That down fell both the Ram's horns in the court;
    And who should find them but the Empress' villain?
    She laugh'd, and told the Moor he should not choose
    But give them to his master for a present.
  TITUS. Why, there it goes! God give his lordship joy!

    Enter the CLOWN, with a basket and two pigeons in it

    News, news from heaven! Marcus, the post is come.
    Sirrah, what tidings? Have you any letters?
    Shall I have justice? What says Jupiter?
  CLOWN. Ho, the gibbet-maker? He says that he hath taken them down
    again, for the man must not be hang'd till the next week.
  TITUS. But what says Jupiter, I ask thee?
  CLOWN. Alas, sir, I know not Jupiter; I never drank with him in all
    my life.
  TITUS. Why, villain, art not thou the carrier?
  CLOWN. Ay, of my pigeons, sir; nothing else.
  TITUS. Why, didst thou not come from heaven?
  CLOWN. From heaven! Alas, sir, I never came there. God forbid I
    should be so bold to press to heaven in my young days. Why, I am
    going with my pigeons to the Tribunal Plebs, to take up a matter
    of brawl betwixt my uncle and one of the Emperal's men.
  MARCUS. Why, sir, that is as fit as can be to serve for your
    oration; and let him deliver the pigeons to the Emperor from you.
  TITUS. Tell me, can you deliver an oration to the Emperor with a
    grace?
  CLOWN. Nay, truly, sir, I could never say grace in all my life.
  TITUS. Sirrah, come hither. Make no more ado,
    But give your pigeons to the Emperor;
    By me thou shalt have justice at his hands.
    Hold, hold! Meanwhile here's money for thy charges.
    Give me pen and ink. Sirrah, can you with a grace deliver up a
    supplication?
  CLOWN. Ay, sir.
  TITUS. Then here is a supplication for you. And when you come to
    him, at the first approach you must kneel; then kiss his foot;
    then deliver up your pigeons; and then look for your reward. I'll
    be at hand, sir; see you do it bravely.
  CLOWN. I warrant you, sir; let me alone.
  TITUS. Sirrah, hast thou a knife? Come let me see it.
    Here, Marcus, fold it in the oration;
    For thou hast made it like a humble suppliant.
    And when thou hast given it to the Emperor,
    Knock at my door, and tell me what he says.
  CLOWN. God be with you, sir; I will.
  TITUS. Come, Marcus, let us go. Publius, follow me.     Exeunt
                           SCENE IV.
                  Rome. Before the palace

     Enter the EMPEROR, and the EMPRESS and her two sons,
   DEMETRIUS and CHIRON; LORDS and others. The EMPEROR brings
        the arrows in his hand that TITUS shot at him

  SATURNINUS. Why, lords, what wrongs are these! Was ever seen
    An emperor in Rome thus overborne,
    Troubled, confronted thus; and, for the extent
    Of egal justice, us'd in such contempt?
    My lords, you know, as know the mightful gods,
    However these disturbers of our peace
    Buzz in the people's ears, there nought hath pass'd
    But even with law against the wilful sons
    Of old Andronicus. And what an if
    His sorrows have so overwhelm'd his wits,
    Shall we be thus afflicted in his wreaks,
    His fits, his frenzy, and his bitterness?
    And now he writes to heaven for his redress.
    See, here's 'To Jove' and this 'To Mercury';
    This 'To Apollo'; this 'To the God of War'-
    Sweet scrolls to fly about the streets of Rome!
    What's this but libelling against the Senate,
    And blazoning our unjustice every where?
    A goodly humour, is it not, my lords?
    As who would say in Rome no justice were.
    But if I live, his feigned ecstasies
    Shall be no shelter to these outrages;
    But he and his shall know that justice lives
    In Saturninus' health; whom, if she sleep,
    He'll so awake as he in fury shall
    Cut off the proud'st conspirator that lives.
  TAMORA. My gracious lord, my lovely Saturnine,
    Lord of my life, commander of my thoughts,
    Calm thee, and bear the faults of Titus' age,
    Th' effects of sorrow for his valiant sons
    Whose loss hath pierc'd him deep and scarr'd his heart;
    And rather comfort his distressed plight
    Than prosecute the meanest or the best
    For these contempts.  [Aside]  Why, thus it shall become
    High-witted Tamora to gloze with all.
    But, Titus, I have touch'd thee to the quick,
    Thy life-blood out; if Aaron now be wise,
    Then is all safe, the anchor in the port.

                       Enter CLOWN

    How now, good fellow! Wouldst thou speak with us?
  CLOWN. Yes, forsooth, an your mistriship be Emperial.
  TAMORA. Empress I am, but yonder sits the Emperor.
  CLOWN. 'Tis he.- God and Saint Stephen give you godden. I have
    brought you a letter and a couple of pigeons here.
                                   [SATURNINUS reads the letter]
  SATURNINUS. Go take him away, and hang him presently.
  CLOWN. How much money must I have?
  TAMORA. Come, sirrah, you must be hang'd.
  CLOWN. Hang'd! by'r lady, then I have brought up a neck to a fair
    end.                                          [Exit guarded]
  SATURNINUS. Despiteful and intolerable wrongs!
    Shall I endure this monstrous villainy?
    I know from whence this same device proceeds.
    May this be borne- as if his traitorous sons
    That died by law for murder of our brother
    Have by my means been butchered wrongfully?
    Go drag the villain hither by the hair;
    Nor age nor honour shall shape privilege.
    For this proud mock I'll be thy slaughterman,
    Sly frantic wretch, that holp'st to make me great,
    In hope thyself should govern Rome and me.

                   Enter NUNTIUS AEMILIUS

    What news with thee, Aemilius?
  AEMILIUS. Arm, my lords! Rome never had more cause.
    The Goths have gathered head; and with a power
    Of high resolved men, bent to the spoil,
    They hither march amain, under conduct
    Of Lucius, son to old Andronicus;
    Who threats in course of this revenge to do
    As much as ever Coriolanus did.
  SATURNINUS. Is warlike Lucius general of the Goths?
    These tidings nip me, and I hang the head
    As flowers with frost, or grass beat down with storms.
    Ay, now begins our sorrows to approach.
    'Tis he the common people love so much;
    Myself hath often heard them say-
    When I have walked like a private man-
    That Lucius' banishment was wrongfully,
    And they have wish'd that Lucius were their emperor.
  TAMORA. Why should you fear? Is not your city strong?
  SATURNINUS. Ay, but the citizens favour Lucius,
    And will revolt from me to succour him.
  TAMORA. King, be thy thoughts imperious like thy name!
    Is the sun dimm'd, that gnats do fly in it?
    The eagle suffers little birds to sing,
    And is not careful what they mean thereby,
    Knowing that with the shadow of his wings
    He can at pleasure stint their melody;
    Even so mayest thou the giddy men of Rome.
    Then cheer thy spirit; for know thou, Emperor,
    I will enchant the old Andronicus
    With words more sweet, and yet more dangerous,
    Than baits to fish or honey-stalks to sheep,
    When as the one is wounded with the bait,
    The other rotted with delicious feed.
  SATURNINUS. But he will not entreat his son for us.
  TAMORA. If Tamora entreat him, then he will;
    For I can smooth and fill his aged ears
    With golden promises, that, were his heart
    Almost impregnable, his old ears deaf,
    Yet should both ear and heart obey my tongue.
    [To AEMILIUS]  Go thou before to be our ambassador;
    Say that the Emperor requests a parley
    Of warlike Lucius, and appoint the meeting
    Even at his father's house, the old Andronicus.
  SATURNINUS. Aemilius, do this message honourably;
    And if he stand on hostage for his safety,
    Bid him demand what pledge will please him best.
  AEMILIUS. Your bidding shall I do effectually.            Exit
  TAMORA. Now will I to that old Andronicus,
    And temper him with all the art I have,
    To pluck proud Lucius from the warlike Goths.
    And now, sweet Emperor, be blithe again,
    And bury all thy fear in my devices.
  SATURNINUS. Then go successantly, and plead to him.
                                                          Exeunt
                        ACT V. SCENE I.
                       Plains near Rome

                         Enter LUCIUS
       with an army of GOTHS with drums and colours

  LUCIUS. Approved warriors and my faithful friends,
    I have received letters from great Rome
    Which signifies what hate they bear their Emperor
    And how desirous of our sight they are.
    Therefore, great lords, be, as your titles witness,
    Imperious and impatient of your wrongs;
    And wherein Rome hath done you any scath,
    Let him make treble satisfaction.
  FIRST GOTH. Brave slip, sprung from the great Andronicus,
    Whose name was once our terror, now our comfort,
    Whose high exploits and honourable deeds
    Ingrateful Rome requites with foul contempt,
    Be bold in us: we'll follow where thou lead'st,
    Like stinging bees in hottest summer's day,
    Led by their master to the flow'red fields,
    And be aveng'd on cursed Tamora.
  ALL THE GOTHS. And as he saith, so say we all with him.
  LUCIUS. I humbly thank him, and I thank you all.
    But who comes here, led by a lusty Goth?

     Enter a GOTH, leading AARON with his CHILD in his arms

  SECOND GOTH. Renowned Lucius, from our troops I stray'd
    To gaze upon a ruinous monastery;
    And as I earnestly did fix mine eye
    Upon the wasted building, suddenly
    I heard a child cry underneath a wall.
    I made unto the noise, when soon I heard
    The crying babe controll'd with this discourse:
    'Peace, tawny slave, half me and half thy dam!
    Did not thy hue bewray whose brat thou art,
    Had nature lent thee but thy mother's look,
    Villain, thou mightst have been an emperor;
    But where the bull and cow are both milk-white,
    They never do beget a coal-black calf.
    Peace, villain, peace!'- even thus he rates the babe-
    'For I must bear thee to a trusty Goth,
    Who, when he knows thou art the Empress' babe,
    Will hold thee dearly for thy mother's sake.'
    With this, my weapon drawn, I rush'd upon him,
    Surpris'd him suddenly, and brought him hither
    To use as you think needful of the man.
  LUCIUS. O worthy Goth, this is the incarnate devil
    That robb'd Andronicus of his good hand;
    This is the pearl that pleas'd your Empress' eye;
    And here's the base fruit of her burning lust.
    Say, wall-ey'd slave, whither wouldst thou convey
    This growing image of thy fiend-like face?
    Why dost not speak? What, deaf? Not a word?
    A halter, soldiers! Hang him on this tree,
    And by his side his fruit of bastardy.
  AARON. Touch not the boy, he is of royal blood.
  LUCIUS. Too like the sire for ever being good.
    First hang the child, that he may see it sprawl-
    A sight to vex the father's soul withal.
    Get me a ladder.
                [A ladder brought, which AARON is made to climb]
  AARON. Lucius, save the child,
    And bear it from me to the Emperess.
    If thou do this, I'll show thee wondrous things
    That highly may advantage thee to hear;
    If thou wilt not, befall what may befall,
    I'll speak no more but 'Vengeance rot you all!'
  LUCIUS. Say on; an if it please me which thou speak'st,
    Thy child shall live, and I will see it nourish'd.
  AARON. An if it please thee! Why, assure thee, Lucius,
    'Twill vex thy soul to hear what I shall speak;
    For I must talk of murders, rapes, and massacres,
    Acts of black night, abominable deeds,
    Complots of mischief, treason, villainies,
    Ruthful to hear, yet piteously perform'd;
    And this shall all be buried in my death,
    Unless thou swear to me my child shall live.
  LUCIUS. Tell on thy mind; I say thy child shall live.
  AARON. Swear that he shall, and then I will begin.
  LUCIUS. Who should I swear by? Thou believest no god;
    That granted, how canst thou believe an oath?
  AARON. What if I do not? as indeed I do not;
    Yet, for I know thou art religious
    And hast a thing within thee called conscience,
    With twenty popish tricks and ceremonies
    Which I have seen thee careful to observe,
    Therefore I urge thy oath. For that I know
    An idiot holds his bauble for a god,
    And keeps the oath which by that god he swears,
    To that I'll urge him. Therefore thou shalt vow
    By that same god- what god soe'er it be
    That thou adorest and hast in reverence-
    To save my boy, to nourish and bring him up;
    Or else I will discover nought to thee.
  LUCIUS. Even by my god I swear to thee I will.
  AARON. First know thou, I begot him on the Empress.
  LUCIUS. O most insatiate and luxurious woman!
  AARON. Tut, Lucius, this was but a deed of charity
    To that which thou shalt hear of me anon.
    'Twas her two sons that murdered Bassianus;
    They cut thy sister's tongue, and ravish'd her,
    And cut her hands, and trimm'd her as thou sawest.
  LUCIUS. O detestable villain! Call'st thou that trimming?
  AARON. Why, she was wash'd, and cut, and trimm'd, and 'twas
    Trim sport for them which had the doing of it.
  LUCIUS. O barbarous beastly villains like thyself!
  AARON. Indeed, I was their tutor to instruct them.
    That codding spirit had they from their mother,
    As sure a card as ever won the set;
    That bloody mind, I think, they learn'd of me,
    As true a dog as ever fought at head.
    Well, let my deeds be witness of my worth.
    I train'd thy brethren to that guileful hole
    Where the dead corpse of Bassianus lay;
    I wrote the letter that thy father found,
    And hid the gold within that letter mention'd,
    Confederate with the Queen and her two sons;
    And what not done, that thou hast cause to rue,
    Wherein I had no stroke of mischief in it?
    I play'd the cheater for thy father's hand,
    And, when I had it, drew myself apart
    And almost broke my heart with extreme laughter.
    I pried me through the crevice of a wall,
    When, for his hand, he had his two sons' heads;
    Beheld his tears, and laugh'd so heartily
    That both mine eyes were rainy like to his;
    And when I told the Empress of this sport,
    She swooned almost at my pleasing tale,
    And for my tidings gave me twenty kisses.
  GOTH. What, canst thou say all this and never blush?
  AARON. Ay, like a black dog, as the saying is.
  LUCIUS. Art thou not sorry for these heinous deeds?
  AARON. Ay, that I had not done a thousand more.
    Even now I curse the day- and yet, I think,
    Few come within the compass of my curse-
    Wherein I did not some notorious ill;
    As kill a man, or else devise his death;
    Ravish a maid, or plot the way to do it;
    Accuse some innocent, and forswear myself;
    Set deadly enmity between two friends;
    Make poor men's cattle break their necks;
    Set fire on barns and hay-stacks in the night,
    And bid the owners quench them with their tears.
    Oft have I digg'd up dead men from their graves,
    And set them upright at their dear friends' door
    Even when their sorrows almost was forgot,
    And on their skins, as on the bark of trees,
    Have with my knife carved in Roman letters
    'Let not your sorrow die, though I am dead.'
    Tut, I have done a thousand dreadful things
    As willingly as one would kill a fly;
    And nothing grieves me heartily indeed
    But that I cannot do ten thousand more.
  LUCIUS. Bring down the devil, for he must not die
    So sweet a death as hanging presently.
  AARON. If there be devils, would I were a devil,
    To live and burn in everlasting fire,
    So I might have your company in hell
    But to torment you with my bitter tongue!
  LUCIUS. Sirs, stop his mouth, and let him speak no more.

                       Enter AEMILIUS

  GOTH. My lord, there is a messenger from Rome
    Desires to be admitted to your presence.
  LUCIUS. Let him come near.
    Welcome, Aemilius. What's the news from Rome?
  AEMILIUS. Lord Lucius, and you Princes of the Goths,
    The Roman Emperor greets you all by me;
    And, for he understands you are in arms,
    He craves a parley at your father's house,
    Willing you to demand your hostages,
    And they shall be immediately deliver'd.
  FIRST GOTH. What says our general?
  LUCIUS. Aemilius, let the Emperor give his pledges
    Unto my father and my uncle Marcus.
    And we will come. March away.                         Exeunt
                         SCENE II.
                 Rome. Before TITUS' house

                        Enter TAMORA,
     and her two sons, DEMETRIUS and CHIRON, disguised

  TAMORA. Thus, in this strange and sad habiliment,
    I will encounter with Andronicus,
    And say I am Revenge, sent from below
    To join with him and right his heinous wrongs.
    Knock at his study, where they say he keeps
    To ruminate strange plots of dire revenge;
    Tell him Revenge is come to join with him,
    And work confusion on his enemies.

         They knock and TITUS opens his study door, above

  TITUS. Who doth molest my contemplation?
    Is it your trick to make me ope the door,
    That so my sad decrees may fly away
    And all my study be to no effect?
    You are deceiv'd; for what I mean to do
    See here in bloody lines I have set down;
    And what is written shall be executed.
  TAMORA. Titus, I am come to talk with thee.
  TITUS. No, not a word. How can I grace my talk,
    Wanting a hand to give it that accord?
    Thou hast the odds of me; therefore no more.
  TAMORA. If thou didst know me, thou wouldst talk with me.
  TITUS. I am not mad, I know thee well enough:
    Witness this wretched stump, witness these crimson lines;
    Witness these trenches made by grief and care;
    Witness the tiring day and heavy night;
    Witness all sorrow that I know thee well
    For our proud Empress, mighty Tamora.
    Is not thy coming for my other hand?
  TAMORA. Know thou, sad man, I am not Tamora:
    She is thy enemy and I thy friend.
    I am Revenge, sent from th' infernal kingdom
    To ease the gnawing vulture of thy mind
    By working wreakful vengeance on thy foes.
    Come down and welcome me to this world's light;
    Confer with me of murder and of death;
    There's not a hollow cave or lurking-place,
    No vast obscurity or misty vale,
    Where bloody murder or detested rape
    Can couch for fear but I will find them out;
    And in their ears tell them my dreadful name-
    Revenge, which makes the foul offender quake.
  TITUS. Art thou Revenge? and art thou sent to me
    To be a torment to mine enemies?
  TAMORA. I am; therefore come down and welcome me.
  TITUS. Do me some service ere I come to thee.
    Lo, by thy side where Rape and Murder stands;
    Now give some surance that thou art Revenge-
    Stab them, or tear them on thy chariot wheels;
    And then I'll come and be thy waggoner
    And whirl along with thee about the globes.
    Provide thee two proper palfreys, black as jet,
    To hale thy vengeful waggon swift away,
    And find out murderers in their guilty caves;
    And when thy car is loaden with their heads,
    I will dismount, and by thy waggon wheel
    Trot, like a servile footman, all day long,
    Even from Hyperion's rising in the east
    Until his very downfall in the sea.
    And day by day I'll do this heavy task,
    So thou destroy Rapine and Murder there.
  TAMORA. These are my ministers, and come with me.
  TITUS. Are they thy ministers? What are they call'd?
  TAMORA. Rape and Murder; therefore called so
    'Cause they take vengeance of such kind of men.
  TITUS. Good Lord, how like the Empress' sons they are!
    And you the Empress! But we worldly men
    Have miserable, mad, mistaking eyes.
    O sweet Revenge, now do I come to thee;
    And, if one arm's embracement will content thee,
    I will embrace thee in it by and by.
  TAMORA. This closing with him fits his lunacy.
    Whate'er I forge to feed his brain-sick humours,
    Do you uphold and maintain in your speeches,
    For now he firmly takes me for Revenge;
    And, being credulous in this mad thought,
    I'll make him send for Lucius his son,
    And whilst I at a banquet hold him sure,
    I'll find some cunning practice out of hand
    To scatter and disperse the giddy Goths,
    Or, at the least, make them his enemies.
    See, here he comes, and I must ply my theme.

                 Enter TITUS, below

  TITUS. Long have I been forlorn, and all for thee.
    Welcome, dread Fury, to my woeful house.
    Rapine and Murder, you are welcome too.
    How like the Empress and her sons you are!
    Well are you fitted, had you but a Moor.
    Could not all hell afford you such a devil?
    For well I wot the Empress never wags
    But in her company there is a Moor;
    And, would you represent our queen aright,
    It were convenient you had such a devil.
    But welcome as you are. What shall we do?
  TAMORA. What wouldst thou have us do, Andronicus?
  DEMETRIUS. Show me a murderer, I'll deal with him.
  CHIRON. Show me a villain that hath done a rape,
    And I am sent to be reveng'd on him.
  TAMORA. Show me a thousand that hath done thee wrong,
    And I will be revenged on them all.
  TITUS. Look round about the wicked streets of Rome,
    And when thou find'st a man that's like thyself,
    Good Murder, stab him; he's a murderer.
    Go thou with him, and when it is thy hap
    To find another that is like to thee,
    Good Rapine, stab him; he is a ravisher.
    Go thou with them; and in the Emperor's court
    There is a queen, attended by a Moor;
    Well shalt thou know her by thine own proportion,
    For up and down she doth resemble thee.
    I pray thee, do on them some violent death;
    They have been violent to me and mine.
  TAMORA. Well hast thou lesson'd us; this shall we do.
    But would it please thee, good Andronicus,
    To send for Lucius, thy thrice-valiant son,
    Who leads towards Rome a band of warlike Goths,
    And bid him come and banquet at thy house;
    When he is here, even at thy solemn feast,
    I will bring in the Empress and her sons,
    The Emperor himself, and all thy foes;
    And at thy mercy shall they stoop and kneel,
    And on them shalt thou ease thy angry heart.
    What says Andronicus to this device?
  TITUS. Marcus, my brother! 'Tis sad Titus calls.

                  Enter MARCUS

    Go, gentle Marcus, to thy nephew Lucius;
    Thou shalt inquire him out among the Goths.
    Bid him repair to me, and bring with him
    Some of the chiefest princes of the Goths;
    Bid him encamp his soldiers where they are.
    Tell him the Emperor and the Empress too
    Feast at my house, and he shall feast with them.
    This do thou for my love; and so let him,
    As he regards his aged father's life.
  MARCUS. This will I do, and soon return again.            Exit
  TAMORA. Now will I hence about thy business,
    And take my ministers along with me.
  TITUS. Nay, nay, let Rape and Murder stay with me,
    Or else I'll call my brother back again,
    And cleave to no revenge but Lucius.
  TAMORA.  [Aside to her sons]  What say you, boys? Will you abide
      with him,
    Whiles I go tell my lord the Emperor
    How I have govern'd our determin'd jest?
    Yield to his humour, smooth and speak him fair,
    And tarry with him till I turn again.
  TITUS.  [Aside]  I knew them all, though they suppos'd me mad,
    And will o'er reach them in their own devices,
    A pair of cursed hell-hounds and their dam.
  DEMETRIUS. Madam, depart at pleasure; leave us here.
  TAMORA. Farewell, Andronicus, Revenge now goes
    To lay a complot to betray thy foes.
  TITUS. I know thou dost; and, sweet Revenge, farewell.
                                                     Exit TAMORA
  CHIRON. Tell us, old man, how shall we be employ'd?
  TITUS. Tut, I have work enough for you to do.
    Publius, come hither, Caius, and Valentine.

          Enter PUBLIUS, CAIUS, and VALENTINE

  PUBLIUS. What is your will?
  TITUS. Know you these two?
  PUBLIUS. The Empress' sons, I take them: Chiron, Demetrius.
  TITUS. Fie, Publius, fie! thou art too much deceiv'd.
    The one is Murder, and Rape is the other's name;
    And therefore bind them, gentle Publius-
    Caius and Valentine, lay hands on them.
    Oft have you heard me wish for such an hour,
    And now I find it; therefore bind them sure,
    And stop their mouths if they begin to cry.             Exit
                         [They lay hold on CHIRON and DEMETRIUS]
  CHIRON. Villains, forbear! we are the Empress' sons.
  PUBLIUS. And therefore do we what we are commanded.
    Stop close their mouths, let them not speak a word.
    Is he sure bound? Look that you bind them fast.

               Re-enter TITUS ANDRONICUS
        with a knife, and LAVINIA, with a basin

  TITUS. Come, come, Lavinia; look, thy foes are bound.
    Sirs, stop their mouths, let them not speak to me;
    But let them hear what fearful words I utter.
    O villains, Chiron and Demetrius!
    Here stands the spring whom you have stain'd with mud;
    This goodly summer with your winter mix'd.
    You kill'd her husband; and for that vile fault
    Two of her brothers were condemn'd to death,
    My hand cut off and made a merry jest;
    Both her sweet hands, her tongue, and that more dear
    Than hands or tongue, her spotless chastity,
    Inhuman traitors, you constrain'd and forc'd.
    What would you say, if I should let you speak?
    Villains, for shame you could not beg for grace.
    Hark, wretches! how I mean to martyr you.
    This one hand yet is left to cut your throats,
    Whiles that Lavinia 'tween her stumps doth hold
    The basin that receives your guilty blood.
    You know your mother means to feast with me,
    And calls herself Revenge, and thinks me mad.
    Hark, villains! I will grind your bones to dust,
    And with your blood and it I'll make a paste;
    And of the paste a coffin I will rear,
    And make two pasties of your shameful heads;
    And bid that strumpet, your unhallowed dam,
    Like to the earth, swallow her own increase.
    This is the feast that I have bid her to,
    And this the banquet she shall surfeit on;
    For worse than Philomel you us'd my daughter,
    And worse than Progne I will be reveng'd.
    And now prepare your throats. Lavinia, come,
    Receive the blood; and when that they are dead,
    Let me go grind their bones to powder small,
    And with this hateful liquor temper it;
    And in that paste let their vile heads be bak'd.
    Come, come, be every one officious
    To make this banquet, which I wish may prove
    More stern and bloody than the Centaurs' feast.
                                         [He cuts their throats]
    So.
    Now bring them in, for I will play the cook,
    And see them ready against their mother comes.
                                 Exeunt, bearing the dead bodies
                         SCENE III.
                 The court of TITUS' house

            Enter Lucius, MARCUS, and the GOTHS,
            with AARON prisoner, and his CHILD
                in the arms of an attendant

  LUCIUS. Uncle Marcus, since 'tis my father's mind
    That I repair to Rome, I am content.
    FIRST GOTH. And ours with thine, befall what fortune will.
  LUCIUS. Good uncle, take you in this barbarous Moor,
    This ravenous tiger, this accursed devil;
    Let him receive no sust'nance, fetter him,
    Till he be brought unto the Empress' face
    For testimony of her foul proceedings.
    And see the ambush of our friends be strong;
    I fear the Emperor means no good to us.
  AARON. Some devil whisper curses in my ear,
    And prompt me that my tongue may utter forth
    The venomous malice of my swelling heart!
  LUCIUS. Away, inhuman dog, unhallowed slave!
    Sirs, help our uncle to convey him in.
                        Exeunt GOTHS with AARON. Flourish within
    The trumpets show the Emperor is at hand.

            Sound trumpets. Enter SATURNINUS and
    TAMORA, with AEMILIUS, TRIBUNES, SENATORS, and others

  SATURNINUS. What, hath the firmament more suns than one?
  LUCIUS. What boots it thee to can thyself a sun?
  MARCUS. Rome's Emperor, and nephew, break the parle;
    These quarrels must be quietly debated.
    The feast is ready which the careful Titus
    Hath ordain'd to an honourable end,
    For peace, for love, for league, and good to Rome.
    Please you, therefore, draw nigh and take your places.
  SATURNINUS. Marcus, we will.
                      [A table brought in. The company sit down]

               Trumpets sounding, enter TITUS
         like a cook, placing the dishes, and LAVINIA
   with a veil over her face; also YOUNG LUCIUS, and others

  TITUS. Welcome, my lord; welcome, dread Queen;
    Welcome, ye warlike Goths; welcome, Lucius;
    And welcome all. Although the cheer be poor,
    'Twill fill your stomachs; please you eat of it.
  SATURNINUS. Why art thou thus attir'd, Andronicus?
  TITUS. Because I would be sure to have all well
    To entertain your Highness and your Empress.
  TAMORA. We are beholding to you, good Andronicus.
  TITUS. An if your Highness knew my heart, you were.
    My lord the Emperor, resolve me this:
    Was it well done of rash Virginius
    To slay his daughter with his own right hand,
    Because she was enforc'd, stain'd, and deflower'd?
  SATURNINUS. It was, Andronicus.
  TITUS. Your reason, mighty lord.
  SATURNINUS. Because the girl should not survive her shame,
    And by her presence still renew his sorrows.
  TITUS. A reason mighty, strong, and effectual;
    A pattern, precedent, and lively warrant
    For me, most wretched, to perform the like.
    Die, die, Lavinia, and thy shame with thee;   [He kills her]
    And with thy shame thy father's sorrow die!
  SATURNINUS. What hast thou done, unnatural and unkind?
  TITUS. Kill'd her for whom my tears have made me blind.
    I am as woeful as Virginius was,
    And have a thousand times more cause than he
    To do this outrage; and it now is done.
  SATURNINUS. What, was she ravish'd? Tell who did the deed.
  TITUS. Will't please you eat?  Will't please your Highness feed?
  TAMORA. Why hast thou slain thine only daughter thus?
  TITUS. Not I; 'twas Chiron and Demetrius.
    They ravish'd her, and cut away her tongue;
    And they, 'twas they, that did her all this wrong.
  SATURNINUS. Go, fetch them hither to us presently.
  TITUS. Why, there they are, both baked in this pie,
    Whereof their mother daintily hath fed,
    Eating the flesh that she herself hath bred.
    'Tis true, 'tis true: witness my knife's sharp point.
                                          [He stabs the EMPRESS]
  SATURNINUS. Die, frantic wretch, for this accursed deed!
                                                [He stabs TITUS]
  LUCIUS. Can the son's eye behold his father bleed?
    There's meed for meed, death for a deadly deed.
                   [He stabs SATURNINUS. A great tumult. LUCIUS,
               MARCUS, and their friends go up into the balcony]
  MARCUS. You sad-fac'd men, people and sons of Rome,
    By uproars sever'd, as a flight of fowl
    Scatter'd by winds and high tempestuous gusts?
    O, let me teach you how to knit again
    This scattered corn into one mutual sheaf,
    These broken limbs again into one body;
    Lest Rome herself be bane unto herself,
    And she whom mighty kingdoms curtsy to,
    Like a forlorn and desperate castaway,
    Do shameful execution on herself.
    But if my frosty signs and chaps of age,
    Grave witnesses of true experience,
    Cannot induce you to attend my words,
    [To Lucius]  Speak, Rome's dear friend, as erst our ancestor,
    When with his solemn tongue he did discourse
    To love-sick Dido's sad attending ear
    The story of that baleful burning night,
    When subtle Greeks surpris'd King Priam's Troy.
    Tell us what Sinon hath bewitch'd our ears,
    Or who hath brought the fatal engine in
    That gives our Troy, our Rome, the civil wound.
    My heart is not compact of flint nor steel;
    Nor can I utter all our bitter grief,
    But floods of tears will drown my oratory
    And break my utt'rance, even in the time
    When it should move ye to attend me most,
    And force you to commiseration.
    Here's Rome's young Captain, let him tell the tale;
    While I stand by and weep to hear him speak.
  LUCIUS. Then, gracious auditory, be it known to you
    That Chiron and the damn'd Demetrius
    Were they that murd'red our Emperor's brother;
    And they it were that ravished our sister.
    For their fell faults our brothers were beheaded,
    Our father's tears despis'd, and basely cozen'd
    Of that true hand that fought Rome's quarrel out
    And sent her enemies unto the grave.
    Lastly, myself unkindly banished,
    The gates shut on me, and turn'd weeping out,
    To beg relief among Rome's enemies;
    Who drown'd their enmity in my true tears,
    And op'd their arms to embrace me as a friend.
    I am the turned forth, be it known to you,
    That have preserv'd her welfare in my blood
    And from her bosom took the enemy's point,
    Sheathing the steel in my advent'rous body.
    Alas! you know I am no vaunter, I;
    My scars can witness, dumb although they are,
    That my report is just and full of truth.
    But, soft! methinks I do digress too much,
    Citing my worthless praise. O, pardon me!
    For when no friends are by, men praise themselves.
  MARCUS. Now is my turn to speak. Behold the child.
                  [Pointing to the CHILD in an attendant's arms]
    Of this was Tamora delivered,
    The issue of an irreligious Moor,
    Chief architect and plotter of these woes.
    The villain is alive in Titus' house,
    Damn'd as he is, to witness this is true.
    Now judge what cause had Titus to revenge
    These wrongs unspeakable, past patience,
    Or more than any living man could bear.
    Now have you heard the truth: what say you, Romans?
    Have we done aught amiss, show us wherein,
    And, from the place where you behold us pleading,
    The poor remainder of Andronici
    Will, hand in hand, all headlong hurl ourselves,
    And on the ragged stones beat forth our souls,
    And make a mutual closure of our house.
    Speak, Romans, speak; and if you say we shall,
    Lo, hand in hand, Lucius and I will fall.
  AEMILIUS. Come, come, thou reverend man of Rome,
    And bring our Emperor gently in thy hand,
    Lucius our Emperor; for well I know
    The common voice do cry it shall be so.
  ALL. Lucius, all hail, Rome's royal Emperor!
  MARCUS. Go, go into old Titus' sorrowful house,
    And hither hale that misbelieving Moor
    To be adjudg'd some direful slaught'ring death,
    As punishment for his most wicked life.          Exeunt some
              attendants. LUCIUS, MARCUS, and the others descend
  ALL. Lucius, all hail, Rome's gracious governor!
  LUCIUS. Thanks, gentle Romans! May I govern so
    To heal Rome's harms and wipe away her woe!
    But, gentle people, give me aim awhile,
    For nature puts me to a heavy task.
    Stand all aloof; but, uncle, draw you near
    To shed obsequious tears upon this trunk.
    O, take this warm kiss on thy pale cold lips.  [Kisses TITUS]
    These sorrowful drops upon thy blood-stain'd face,
    The last true duties of thy noble son!
  MARCUS. Tear for tear and loving kiss for kiss
    Thy brother Marcus tenders on thy lips.
    O, were the sum of these that I should pay
    Countless and infinite, yet would I pay them!
  LUCIUS. Come hither, boy; come, come, come, and learn of us
    To melt in showers. Thy grandsire lov'd thee well;
    Many a time he danc'd thee on his knee,
    Sung thee asleep, his loving breast thy pillow;
    Many a story hath he told to thee,
    And bid thee bear his pretty tales in mind
    And talk of them when he was dead and gone.
  MARCUS. How many thousand times hath these poor lips,
    When they were living, warm'd themselves on thine!
    O, now, sweet boy, give them their latest kiss!
    Bid him farewell; commit him to the grave;
    Do them that kindness, and take leave of them.
  BOY. O grandsire, grandsire! ev'n with all my heart
    Would I were dead, so you did live again!
    O Lord, I cannot speak to him for weeping;
    My tears will choke me, if I ope my mouth.

            Re-enter attendants with AARON

  A ROMAN. You sad Andronici, have done with woes;
    Give sentence on the execrable wretch
    That hath been breeder of these dire events.
  LUCIUS. Set him breast-deep in earth, and famish him;
    There let him stand and rave and cry for food.
    If any one relieves or pities him,
    For the offence he dies. This is our doom.
    Some stay to see him fast'ned in the earth.
  AARON. Ah, why should wrath be mute and fury dumb?
    I am no baby, I, that with base prayers
    I should repent the evils I have done;
    Ten thousand worse than ever yet I did
    Would I perform, if I might have my will.
    If one good deed in all my life I did,
    I do repent it from my very soul.
  LUCIUS. Some loving friends convey the Emperor hence,
    And give him burial in his father's grave.
    My father and Lavinia shall forthwith
    Be closed in our household's monument.
    As for that ravenous tiger, Tamora,
    No funeral rite, nor man in mourning weed,
    No mournful bell shall ring her burial;
    But throw her forth to beasts and birds to prey.
    Her life was beastly and devoid of pity,
    And being dead, let birds on her take pity.           Exeunt

